Source: http://intra.iitj.ac.in/acad_website/intra/2.%20B.Tech%20EE_updated%2015.3.2022.pdf
================================================================================

Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2nd year onwards B.Tech. Electrical 
Engineering Curriculum Structure 
AY 2020-21 
1 
 
1. Introduction 
The vision of the Department is to develop a world class teaching and research atmosphere by excelling in 
fundamental knowledge and applications of Electrical Engineering through curricular and co -curricular 
activities. In line with this vision, the department offers an undergraduate program to attract highly motivated 
students who are interested in cutting -edge technologies in the broad discipline of electrical  engineering, and 
wish for a flexible program to consider a variety of career paths through capability-linked specializations of their 
choice. 
 
The program provides strong fundamentals in mathematics and science which develop analytical thinking and 
form the basis of the diverse tool set used by electrical engineers to innovate, design and develop the technology 
of the future. The engineering design component is integrated throughout the curriculum, motivating and 
familiarizing students with the real-world engineering challenges and equipping them with the essential technical 
skills for problem solving. The early strong theoretical foundations and hand -on exposure are supplemented by 
the core electrical engineering concepts ranging from circuit analysis and design, computing, control, 
communication, signal processing, and power engineering. Additional problem -solving skills and practical 
experience are developed through design projects and laboratory experiments.  
 
The curriculum offers flexibility to student s for pursuing capability -linked specializations of their choice. The 
department specializations are designed to enable students to lead technological innovations addressing the 
emerging industrial and societal challenges in various domains of electrical engineering. The EE students can opt 
for any one of the departmental specializations in Cyber Physical Systems, Intelligent Communication and Networking, 
Communication Engineering, VLSI Systems, Visual Computing, Socio -Digital Reality, Nano and Flexible Ele ctronics, 
Smart Grid, and Artificial Intelligence of Things . The in-depth understanding and technical skills acquired through 
these specializations will enable graduates to play a vital role in advancement of technologies such as 5G/6G 
communications, smart cities, smart healthcare, and Industry 4.0. 
 
Another distinct feature of the curriculum is provision for minors in Entrepreneurship or Management or 
interdisciplinary specializations in Smart Healthcare, Artificial Intelligence, and Robotics and Mobility  Systems that 
allow students to pursue diverse career goals. Students will also have an opportunity to opt for a B. Tech. - 
Master’s dual degree in their chosen specialization or minor area. The curriculum also offers numerous options 
that enable students to gain industrial experience through collaborative industrial projects at industries and 
entrepreneurship experience at the Institute's incubation centre.  
 
 
2. Objectives of the program 
The program aims at imparting theoretical foundations and practical skills of electrical engineering discipline. It 
prepares graduates for three potential career paths: 
1. An industrial path to take up the role of a technical leader or a manager through life -long learning. 
2. An entrepreneurial path to apply the acquired knowledge to develop new products and initiate Deep Tech 
Start-up Company. 
3. An academic path to enter a top -tier graduate program to conduct cutting -edge research with broad 
applications, and eventually to pursue a research or academic profession.  
 
 
3. Expected Graduate Attributes 
 
Graduates of the UG program in EE are expected to have following attributes:  
1. Strong understanding of fundamentals of mathematics, science and engineering with emphasis on electrical 
technologies for Communication, Signal Processin g, Devices & Circuits, Computing Systems, Control 
Engineering, and Power Engineering 
2. Ability to apply technical skills to identify, formulate, and solve complex problems encountered in modern 
electrical engineering practices.  
3. Ability to model, analyze, design and experimentally evaluate electrical components or systems that achieve 
desired technical specifications, subject to certain resource constraints.  
2 
 
4. Ability to compete effectively in a world of rapid technological advancements and assume leadership roles 
within academic, industrial, or entrepreneurial environments in the broad context of electrical engineering.  
5. Have established the foundations for critical thinking that are needed to broaden their careers in diverse 
disciplines through minor/ graduate-level studies and the process of life-long learning. 
6. Ability to recognize and practice professional ethics in working environment.  
7. Ability to acquire new knowledge and integrate it in the existing paradigm so as to create new innovative 
electrical systems for the current and future usage and apply it as needed. 
 
 
4. Learning Outcomes 
 
The graduates of EE UG program will be able: 
1. To acquire knowledge of electrical engineering principles along with the required understanding of 
computing, engineering fundamentals, mathematics, and science.  
2. To apply the concepts of mathematics, sciences and engineering (including computing science) to analyze and 
design complex electrical and electronic circuits and systems containing hardware and software modules.  
3. To gain in -depth understanding of concepts of Signals, Devices, Circuits, Systems, Machine Learning, 
Programming, Control, Communications, Hardware Design and related interdisciplinary topics.  
4. To create, select, and apply appropriate techniques, resources, el ectrical engineering design and computing 
tools to solve complex engineering problems with an understanding of the limitations through laboratory 
exercises and design projects. 
5. To perform literature review and patent landscaping for innovative research.  
6. To adapt to work in multidisciplinary environment. 
7. To understand professional ethics and social responsibilities. 
8. To develop technical presentation skills and communicate effectively.  
9. To engage in independent learning in the context of technological advancem ents. 
10. To conduct develop attitude for product design and entrepreneurial activities.  
 
 
5. New skill sets targeted 
EE students explore subjects critical to advancement in today’s needs — from circuit design and electronics to 
computing, control and communication, and machine learning. The acquired knowledge will be helpful in future 
technologies including:  
1. 5G and Beyond Communications 
2. Cyber Physical Systems 
3. Nano-electronics and Quantum Devices 
4. Smart Grid 
3 
 
6. Topic clouds and Mapping of Topic clouds with proposed courses 
 
Table 1. Topics and Mapping of Topic with Courses 
Area Category  Topics Course (IE/IS/PC/PE) 
Communi
cation 
Core 
Random Variables, Stochastic Processes, 
Stationarity, Ergodicity, Discrete and 
Continuous  Random Processes 
Probability, Statistics and 
Stochastic Processes (IE, MA) 
Signal and System Classification, LTI 
Systems Properties and Response,  Fourier, 
Laplace and z-Transform, Sampling  
Signals and Systems (IE, EE) 
EM Wave Propagation, Transmission Lines, 
Waveguides and Antennas 
Engineering Electromagnetics 
(PC) 
Modelling of Noise and Channels, Noise 
through LTI Systems, Modulation, Digital 
Baseband and Passband Transmissions,  
Communication Systems (PC) 
 
 Techniques 
OSI Architecture, Source Coding, Error 
correction techniques, Queuing Theory, 
Switching Techniques, Controlled and 
Random Access, Routing, End-to-End 
Reliability 
Data Communication Networks 
(PC) 
 
Quantization, Discrete Fourier Transform, 
Fast Fourier Transform, Circular 
Convolution, Multirate Signal Processing 
Digital Signal Processing (PC) 
 
Source Coding, Channel Coding, Channel 
Capacity Theorem, AWGN Channel 
Capacity, Multiuser Channel Capacity 
Information Theory and Coding 
(PE) 
Systems 
 
 
5G and beyond Communications 
 
 
Cellular Communication 
Networks (PE) 
Spread Spectrum 
Communications (PE) 
Satellite Communications (PE) 
Microwave Engineering (PE) 
Computer Networks (PE) 
Optical Communication 
Systems (PE) 
4 
 
EE UG – Communications Concentration Roadmap 
 
Area Category  Topics Course (IE/IS/PC/PE) 
Signal 
Processing 
Core 
Probability, Random Variables, 
Concentration bounds, Linear Prediction, 
Covariance Matrix, Random Processes, 
Probability, Statistics and 
Stochastic Processes (IE, 
MA) 
Signal Transforms, Signals through LTI 
Systems, Sampling and Quantization 
Signals and Systems (IE, 
EE) 
 
Basics of Complexity Analysis, Data 
Structures, Sorting, Searching, Shortest 
Paths. 
Data Structures and 
Algorithms (PC) 
 
Techniques 
Sampling and Reconstruction, Fourier 
Analysis (CTFT, DTFT), Discrete Fourier 
Transform, Quantization Error Analysis,  
Finite Length Effects,  FIR and IIR Filter 
Design and Implementation, Multi-rate 
Systems 
Digital Signal processing 
(PC) 
 
 
Shannon’s lossless source coding theorem 
and rate-distortion theory 
Information Theory and 
Coding (PE) 
Systems Signal Processing and Interpretation 
Signal Compression (PE) 
Speech Processing (PE) 
System Identification (PE) 
Digital Image Processing 
(PE) 

5 
 
 
EE UG – Signal Processing Concentration Roadmap 
 
 
 
Area Category  Topics Course (IE/IS/PC/PE) 
Control 
Engineering 
Core 
Signals Through LTI Systems 
Fourier, Laplace and z-Transform 
Systems Modelling in Time and 
Frequency Domain 
Signals and Systems 
(IE),  
Circuit Theory (PC) 
Classical Control Theory, Characteristics of 
Feedback Systems, State-Space Analysis, 
Controller and Observer Design, Compensation 
Techniques 
Control System (PC) 
 
 
Techniques 
Vector spaces and Linear operators, State 
Feedback for MIMO and SISO systems, 
Discrete time system, Linear system stability, 
Controllability, observability, reachability and 
stabilizability, Reduced order observer 
design, Separation principle 
 
Modern Control (PE) 
 
Systems Cyber-Physical Systems 
Nonlinear and 
Adaptive Control (PE) 
Robust and Optimal 
Control (PE) 
Foundations of Cyber-
Physical Systems (PE) 
Introduction to 
Robotics (PE) 

6 
 
 
EE UG – Control Engineering Concentration Roadmap 
 
 
Area Category  Topics Course (IE/IS/PC/PE) 
Devices 
and 
Circuits 
Core 
Quantum Mechanical Tunneling 
Bulk vs Quantum Properties 
Crystals and Energy Bands 
Foundations of Quantum 
Information Processing (IE, 
PH) 
Magnetic Materials Material Science and 
Engineering (IE) 
Heat Transfer Thermodynamics  (IE, ME) 
Fourier Analysis Signals and Systems (IE, EE) 
Basic Circuit Theory Circuit Theory (PC) 
Transmission Lines and Guiding Structures Engineering 
Electromagnetics  (PC) 
Techniques 
Energy Band Formation, Drift and Diffusion, 
Device Physics, MOS Capacitors and 
Transistors, High Power Devices, 
Unconventional Devices 
Physical Electronics (PC) 
 
 
Review of MOSFETs, Single Stage and 
Differential Amplifiers , Cascade and Cascode 
Amplifiers, Operational Amplifiers and 
Feedback, Small Signal and Frequency Response 
Analog Circuits (PC) 
 
 
ASIC Design Flow, CMOS Implementation of 
Gates, Combinational and Sequential Circuits, 
VLSI Design (PE) 
 

7 
 
Static Timing Analysis, Floor planning and 
Routing, Packaging 
Systems Nano-electronics and Integrated Circuits 
Integrated Circuit 
Technology (PE) 
Sensors and Actuators (PE) 
CAD for VLSI(PE) 
Physics and Modeling of 
MOS Transistor (PE) 
 
EE UG – Devices and Circuits Concentration Roadmap 
 
 
 
 
Area Category  Topics Course (IE/IS/PC/PE) 
Computing 
Systems 
Core 
Probability, Random Variables,  
Concentration bounds, Linear 
Prediction, Covariance Matrix,  
Probability, Statistics and 
Stochastic Processes (IE, MA) 
Signal Transforms, Signals through LTI 
Systems, Sampling and Quantization Signals and Systems (IE, EE) 
Design of Digital Circuits 
Implementation using Verilog/HDL 
Digital Design  (PC) 
 
Basics of Complexity Analysis, Data 
Structures, Sorting, Searching, Shortest 
Paths 
Data Structure and Algorithms 
(PC) 
 
Learning methods Pattern Recognition and 
Machine Learning (IE) 
Techniques Pipelined Processing, Memory 
Organization, Interfacing 
Computer Architecture (PC) 
 

8 
 
Sampling Theory and Signal 
Reconstruction, Fast Fourier Transform, 
Digital Filters 
Digital Signal Processing (PC) 
Microprocessors and Microcontrollers, 
Memory Interfacing, Arm Mbed 
Embedded Systems (PC) 
 
Interfacing with GPIOs, Interfacing DC 
Motor, Keyboard Interfacing, Use of 
Timers to produce delay, 
Implementation of Digital Filters  
Digital Systems Lab (PC) 
Systems 
Embedded Computing and SoC 
High Level Synthesis  (PE, CS) 
Real-Time Systems (PE) 
Reconfigurable Computing 
(PE) 
Artificial Intelligence(PE, AI) 
Pervasive and Mobile 
Computing (PE, CS) 
 
EE UG – Computing Systems Concentration Roadmap 
 
 
 
Area Category  Topics Course (IE/IS/PC/PE) 
Power 
Engineering Core 
Signal Transforms, Signals through LTI 
Systems, Sampling and Quantization 
Signals and Systems (IE) 
 
Network theorems, Step and impulse 
response, Two-port network analysis, 
Three phase circuits 
Circuit Theory (PC) 
 
 
Maxwell’s equations, Wave propagation Engineering Electromagnetics 
(PC) 
Thyristor, IGBT Physical Electronics (PC) 

9 
 
Techniques 
Transformers, DC machines, Induction 
machines, Synchronous machines 
Control of machines using converters 
Electrical Machines (PC) 
Electrical Machines Lab (PC) 
Transmission line modelling and 
performance, Per-unit representation of 
power system, Underground cables, 
Overhead line insulators, Power electronic 
converter based, compensation, Integration 
of renewable energy sources, Power system 
monitoring and protection 
Power Engineering (PC) 
Systems  Smart Grid 
Measurement and 
Instrumentation (PE) 
Power System Analysis and 
Stability (PE)  
Power System Operation and 
Control (PE) 
Power Electronics (PE) 
Industrial Drives  (PE) 
 
EE UG – Power Engineering Concentration Roadmap 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 

10 
 
7. Course Categories, credit distribution and Credit Structure of B.Tech. Programmes 
 
Table 2.ProposedCourse Categories and credit distribution in the proposed B.Tech. Programmes  
S.N.  Course Type Course Category  Regular B.Tech. 
Credit  Total 
1 Institute Core (I) 
 
Engineering (IE) 34 69 
Science (IS) 16 
Humanities (IH) 12 
2 Programme Linked (L) Science (LS) 7 
3 Programme Core (P) Programme Compulsory (PC) 52 71 
Programme Electives (PE) 16 
B.Tech. Project (PP) 3 
4 Open (O) Open Electives (OE) 10 10 
5 Engineering Science (E) Engineering Science Core (EC) 0 0 
Engineering Science Elective (EE) 0 0 
Total Graded 150 
6 Non-Graded (N) Humanities (NH) 6 15 
Engineering (NE) 3 
Design/Practical Experience (ND)  6 
Total Graded + Non-Graded   165 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
8. Credit Structure of B.Tech. Programmes 
  
Table 4.Credit Structure for B.Tech. Programmes (Up to 6XXX Level) 
Type L-T-P Distribution of contact and beyond contact hours Total Credits  
(TC=TH/3) Contact Hours 
(CH) 
Beyond Contact 
Hours (BCH) 
Total Hours 
(TH) 
1 hour of Lecture 1-0-0 1 hr 2 hr 3 hr 1 
1 hour of Tutorial 0-1-0 1 hr 2 hr 3hr 1  
1 hour of Lab/Project 0-0-1 1 hr 0.5 hr 1.5 hr 0.5 
#Contact hour for project refers to the involvement of students in the laboratory, discussion, etc.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 
 
9. List of Programme Compulsory Courses 
Table 5. Programme Compulsory Courses 
Sr. No Course Name LTP Contact Hours Credit 
1 Data Structures and Algorithms 3-0-2 5 4 
2 Circuit Theory 3-0-0 3 3 
3 Engineering Electromagnetics 3-0-0 3 3 
4 Physical Electronics 3-0-0 3 3 
5 Digital Design 2-0-2 4 3 
6 Analog Circuits 3-0-3 6 4.5 
7 Electrical Machines 3-0-0 3 3 
8 Communication Systems 3-0-0 3 3 
9 Computer Architecture 3-0-0 3 3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 Control Systems 3-0-3 6 4.5 
11 Digital Signal Processing 3-0-0 3 3 
12 Data Communication Networks 3-0-0 3 3 
13 Power Engineering 3-0-3 6 4.5 
14 Embedded Systems 3-0-0 3 3 
15 Digital Systems Lab 0-0-3 3 1.5 
16 Electrical Machines Lab 0-0-3 3 1.5 
17 Communication Systems Lab 0-0-3 3 1.5 
Total 52 
13 
 
10.  ScanArea-wise Programme Elective Courses 
Table 6. Stream-wise Programme Electives Courses 
S. No. Stream Courses L-T-P Credit 
1 Communication 
Information Theory and Coding (300) 
Computer Networks ( CS) 
Microwave Engineering (400) 
Cellular Communication Networks(400) 
Satellite Communications (400) 
Spread Spectrum Communications(400) 
Optical Communication Systems (400) 
2 Signal Processing 
Digital Image Processing (400) 
Speech Processing (400) 
Signal Compression (400) 
System Identification (400) 
3 Control 
Engineering 
Modern Control (300) 
Nonlinear and Adaptive Control (400) 
Robust and Optimal Control (400) 
Foundations of Cyber Physical Systems (400) 
Introduction to Robotics ( IDRP) 
3-0-0 
3-0-0 
3-0-0 
3-0-0 
3-0-0 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
4 Devices and 
Circuits 
3-0-0 
3-0-2 
3-0-0 
3-0-0 
2-0-2 
3-0-0 
3 
4 
3 
3 
3 
3 
5 Computing 
Systems 
3-0-0 
3-0-0 
3-0-0 
3-0-0 
3-0-0 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
6 Power 
Engineering 
Measurement and Instrumentation (300) 
Power System Analysis and Stability (400)  
Power System Operation and Control (400)  
Power Electronics (400)  
Industrial Drives (400)  
3-0-0 
3-0-0 
3-0-0 
3-0-0 
3-0-0 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
 
 
Mini-Project(0-0-6) 
Program elective component for 8th semester 
 
Design/Practical Experience (ND) 
Options: Three Summer Design Projects (0-0-4) for 2 Credits each or in regular semesters.   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3-0-0 
3-0-0 
3-0-0 
3-0-0 
3-0-0 
3-0-3 
3-0-0 
3-0-0 
3-0-0 
3-0-0 
3-0-0 
3 
4.5 
3
 3
 3
 3 
3 
VLSI Design (300) 
Biosensors (300) 
Integrated Circuit Technology (700) 
Sensors and Actuators (400) 
CAD for VLSI (700) 
Physics and Modeling of MOS Transistor (700) 
Deep Learning ( AI) 
High Level Synthesis ( CS) 
Real-Time Systems (400) 
Reconfigurable Computing (400) 
Mobile and Pervasive Computing (CS) (700)
 
14  
11. Specialization to be offered by the department 
Table 7. Specialization and courses 
 
S. No. Name of 
Specializati
on 
Introduction 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cyber 
Physical 
System 
In today's world, there is a global interest to study systems that can interact with e ach 
other and the surrounding with cooperative objectives, because of the 
introduction of new and cheap computational and communication r esources. Such 
systems are usually referred to as cyber-physical systems (CPS). Almost, e verything 
around us constitutes a cyber-physical system. For instance, traffic networks, a swarm 
of unmanned vehicles, smart power distribution networks, etc., are some of the recent 
technological movements towards automation. 
The philosophy of the cyber-physical systems vertical is to familiarize students with the 
basic building blocks for the analysis and synthesis of such systems, along with hands-
on experiments. The theme of this vertical span through the v arious core subjects 
ranging from design, control, and computing to safety and secu rity of cyber-physical 
systems. 
Specialization Core 
(8 credits) 
Specialization Elective 
(12 Credits) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction to 
Cyber physical 
Systems 3-0-0/ 
Foundation of Cyber 
Physical Systems* 3-
0-0 
 
Security in Cyber 
Physical Systems 2- 
0-0 
 
Advanced Control 
System 3-0-0 
  
*If  a student does Foundation of CPS, she/he will be  exempted from Introduction to CPS course. 
Robust and optimal control 3-0-0  
Nonlinear and Adaptive control 3-0-0  
Modern Control 3-0-0  
Networked Dynamical Systems and Control 3-0-0  
Introduction to robotics 3-0-0  
Autonomous Systems 3-0-0  
Real-Time Systems 3-0-0  
Reconfigurable Computing 3-0-0  
Artificial Intelligence 3-0-0  
Measurement and Instrumentation 3- 0-0 
 Computer Networks 3-0-3  
System Identification 3-0-0 
 Computer Vision 3-0-0  
Edge & Fog Computing 3-0-0  
Vehicular Ad-Hoc Networks (VANETs) 3-0-0  
Introduction to Smart Grid 3-0-0  
Smart Manufacturing 1-0-2  
Resource Constrained AI 3-0-0  
Industry 4.0: Applications in Manufacturing Systems1-0-0  
Optimization 1-0-0  
Specialization Project 0-0-6 
Plugin Electric Vehicles (EE) 3-0-2
Selected Topic on Distributed Generation (EE) 3-0-0
Introduction to Haptics (EE) 3-0-0
Ad Hoc wireless network (CS) 3-0-0
Human machine interface (CS) 
Security and its Applications (CS) 3-0-0 
5G networks (CS) 3-0-0
Artificial Intelligence I (CS) 3-0-0
Artificial Intelligence II (CS) 3-0-0
Real-time Autonomous systems (CS) 3-0-0
Social Network analysis (CS) 3-0-0
Graph theory and its applications (CS) 3-0-0
Introduction to Augmented Reality and Virtual Reality (CS) 3-0-0 
Computer Graphics (CS) 3-0-0 
Computational optimization (CS) 3-0-0 
Dependable AI (CS) 3-0-0 
Robotics and mobility systems (RMS) 3-0-0
Mobile robots (RMS) 3-0-0 
Autonomous systems (RMS) 3-0-0
Aerial Robots (RMS) 3-0-0
Planning and decision making for robots (RMS) 3-0-0 
Tele Robots (RMS)3-0-0
Dynamical Systems (MA)3-0-0
Introduction to data science (MA)3-0-0
Mathematics for data science (MA)3-0-0
Nonlinear dynamics and chaos (MA)3-0-0
15 
 
S. No. Name of 
Specialization 
Introduction 
 
2 Communication 
Engineering 
The fast development of economy and society requires modern and high -
performance communications systems that can reliably communicate the 
massive amount of data originating from various sources including Internet of 
Things, while still offering acceptable levels of energy consumption, equipment 
cost and network deployment and operation cost. To achieve these objective 
communication engineers require a deep mathematical understanding of the 
trade-offs involved in efficient reliable communication design and c ircuits and 
systems for future communication systems. 
 
The core component of the Communication Engineering specialization enables 
students to face these challenges by focusing on topics involving 
communication theory, wireless networking and protocol desig n, security 
architectures, and system performance analysis. The elective bouquet provides 
students an opportunity to either gain required depth for graduate level 
academic programs of their choice or sufficient breadth to expose them to 
defining technology  for future generation communication systems including 
optical and millimeter wave technologies. 
 
Specialization Core  
(8 credits) 
Specialization Elective  
(12 Credits) 
Optical Communication 
Systems(3-0-0) 
 
Wireless Communications 
(3-0-0) 
 
Digital Communications: 
Hands-on (1-0-2) 
3 
Intelligent 
Communication 
and Networking 
 
(EE, AI and CS) 
The development of communications has vastly relied on theories and models, 
from information theory to channel modelling. These traditional approaches are 
showing serious limitations, especially in view of the increased complexity of 
communication networks. The advent of 5G is introducing new challenges for 
mobile communications service providers, and integrating artificial 
intelligence/machine learning techniques into networks is one way the industry 
is addressing these complexities.  Advances in artificial intelligence, particularly 
taking advantage of rapidly increasing network and user behavior data, 
indicates a new technological frontier of communications and networking, not 
Cellular Communication Networks 3-0-0 
MIMO Wireless Communications 3-0-0 
UAV Assisted Wireless Networks 3-0-0 
Spread Spectrum Communications 3-0-0 
Cryptography and Network Security 3-0-0 
Statistical Decision Theory 2-0-0 
Machine Learning for Communications 3-0-0 
Advanced Digital Signal Processing 3-0-0 
Multi-rate Digital Signal Processing 2-0-0 
Adaptive Signal Processing 3-0-0 
Quantum Communications 3-0-0 
Optical Techniques for Communications 2-0-2 
Optical Signal Processing 3-0-0 
Optical Fiber Communications 3-0-0 
Free Space Optical Communication 3-0-0 
Optical Networks 3-0-0 
Antenna Engineering 3-0-0 
RF Integrated Circuits 3-0-0 
Millimeter Wave Technology 3-0-0 
RF System Design for Communications 3-0-0 
Radar Engineering 3-0-0 
Selected Topics in Communication I 1-0-0 
Selected Topics in Communication II 2-0-0 
Selected Topics in Communication III 3-0-0 
Specialization Project 0-0-3 
16 
 
only in new methodology in systems and network design, but also in new 
network architecture accommodating machine learning  for broader and 
efficient services.  
 
The main objective of specialization in Intelligent Communication and 
Networking is to introduce students to new trends, approaches, methods, 
systems, as well as communicati on network architectures and application of 
artificial intelligence and machine learning to address communication network 
management issues. 
 
Specialization Core  
(8 credits) 
Specialization Elective  
(12 Credits) 
Design and Analysis of 
Communication Networks (3-0-2) 
 
Intelligent Radio Networks (3-0-2) 
 
4 
Visual 
Computing 
 
(EE, CS, ME and 
AI) 
This specialization is designed to attract highly motivated students who are 
interested in the signal processing domain with a focus on visual computing. 
Current and future industry trends indicate increased involvement of visual 
computing for various automation processes, healthcare, and e ntertainment. 
The designed curriculum aims to provide education with excellence in some of 
the emerging areas which fall under the broad umbrella of visual computing. 
The curriculum is designed to enable students in choosing a variety of career 
paths such as intelligent visual computing, industry, and entrepreneurship. 
Graduates with specialization in visual computing are expected to have the 
attributes such as strong understanding of fundamentals of Mathematics, Signal 
Processing, Speech Understanding, Com puter Vision, Computer Graphics, 
Haptics, Multimedia Processing, and AR/VR. 
 
Specialization Core  
(8 credits) 
Specialization Elective  
(12 Credits) 
Computer Networks  
Computation Oriented Communications  
Machine Learning  for Communications 
Real-Time Communications 
Delay Tolerant Networks 
Cognitive Internet of  Vehicles 
Hardware-Aware Communications 
Selected Topics in Communication I 
Selected Topics in Communication II 
Selected Topics in Communication III 
Specialization Project 0-0-6
Computational Imaging [3-0-0]
3D Shape Analysis [3-0-0]
Introduction to Haptics [3-0-0]
Advance Machine Learning  [3-0-0]
Computational Photography  [3-0-0]
Video Processing  [3-0-0]
Bio-imaging  [3-0-0]
Medical Image Analysis  [3-0-0]
Image Synthesis  [3-0-0]
Animations  [3-0-0]
Digital Image Processing  [3-0-0]
Visual Perception  [3-0-0]
Introduction to AR and VR  [3-0-0]
Real-Time Vision Architectures  [3-0-0]
Scalable Machine Learning  [3-0-0]
Compressive Sensing  [3-0-0]
Computer Graphics  (3-0-0) 
Computer Vision (3-0-0) 
Visual Computing Lab (0-0-4) 
17 
 
5 
Socio-Digital 
Reality 
(EE, CS and AI) 
The ever growing presence of social media and the need for more realistic ways 
of interacting via the digital world is fuelling novel and exciting industry 
innovations. Many industrial players (Google, Facebook, Microsoft etc.) have 
now dedicated centres a nd futuristic plans in the said area. Hence, this 
specialization seeks to provide students with fundamental knowledge that will 
enable them to design and innovate in several related areas within the broad 
theme of socio-digital reality. 
 
Specialization Core  
(8 credits) 
Specialization Elective  
(12 Credits) 
Social Network (3-0-0), 
Introduction to AR-VR (3-0-0) 
Multimodal interface (0-0-4) 
Introduction to Haptics, 
Design Process, 
Speech Understanding, 
Computer Graphics, 
Human Computer Interface, 
Natural Language Understanding, 
Computer Vision, 
Image and Video Forensics 
Specialization Project 0-0-6 
6 
Nano and 
Flexible 
Electronics 
Semiconductor devices have been at the core for advancement of the current IC 
industry. Till now, the technology has followed Moore’s law for scaling towards 
the sub -10 nm era. To accomplish that, various new materials and device 
structures have found a place in current generation chips. Moreover, various 
issues related to technology scaling such as quantum mech anical effects have 
found importance in R&D for new generation devices. In addition, new non -
volatile memory technologies have been explored for faster and denser 
alternatives to conventional Random Access Memories. Moreover, technologies 
such as Flexible Electronics have emerged as a potential candidate for large area 
and low cost options for hybrid integration of flexible components.  
 
To train the students in this specialization and cover the essential fundamentals, 
three core components have been chosen : Quantum Nano -electronics, Flexible 
and Printed electronics, & Emerging Devices including alternate transistor 
structures and new non -volatile memory devices. These will provide 
fundamental understanding of new generation nanoelectronics, related 
processing, and characterization. The electives will help in shaping the ability of 
the students to think creatively, provide an in depth cognition and expose them 
to deliver towards direct applications and also to undertake industry relevant 
research. A combinati on of nano and flexible electronics will prepare students 
for new age challenges such as cost, power, and wider suitability for various 
applications.  
 
Specialization Core  
(8 credits) 
Specialization Elective  
(12 Credits) 
Introduction to Spintronics (3-0-0) 
Flexible and Printed Electronics (3-0-0) 
Advanced Compact Modeling (2-0-0)  
Nano Sensors 
Quantum Nano-Electronics 
Non-Volatile Memory Technologies 
Image and Video Forensics  [3-0-0]
Selected Topic: Advancements in 
Computer Vision
Selected Topics in Computer Vision
Specialization Project [0-0-6]
Principles of Biological Vision
 
18 
 
Semiconductor Optoelectronics 
Organic Optoelectronics 
Specialization Project 0-0-12  
7 
Artificial 
Intelligence of 
Things (AIoT) 
 
(EE, CS and AI) 
Artificial Intelligence of Things (AIoT) is a combination of artificial intelligence 
(AI) technologies with the internet of things (IoT) infrastructure to achieve more 
efficient IoT operations by enhancing dat a management and analytics. This is 
transformational and mutually beneficial for both technologies as AI improves 
data analytics and decision making capabilities through machine learning and 
IoT adds value through better connectivity, signalling and data e xchange. 
 
The specialization in AIoT is designed to impart knowledge in a wide variety of 
fields such as IoT, communications, VLSI, computing, AI and ML. Design of IoT 
system architecture, its components and applications along with machine 
learning and AI algorithms is covered through courses such as Introduction to 
IoT and Artificial Intelligence. Industry relevant circuit design practices are 
included in courses such as Analog and Interfacing Circuits and Digital and SoC 
Design. The program also features hands-on implementation of IoT systems 
through labs and tutorials. 
Specialization Core  
(8 credits) 
Specialization Elective  
(12 Credits) 
8 
VLSI  Systems 
 
(EE and CS) 
In the current era of Internet-of-Things (IoT), Artificial Intelligence (AI) and 5G 
Circuits, there are multiple prototypes being proposed and demonstrated these 
days for smart and real -time applications. To support this, high -speed 
circuits/systems are required which should be able to handle high bandwidth 
requirements of these applications. Over the de cades, Very Large Scale 
Integration (VLSI) technologies have been a robust way to implement the 
required functionality through digital systems implementation and make it very 
easy for the designers at different abstraction levels to transfer the intellectu al 
properties. For meeting timing and power requirements in these systems, 
various aspects of application-specific integrated implementation of digital and 
analog circuits/systems is required. 
 
This program aims to provide the students an exposure by makin g them 
understand the functioning, designing and testing of VLSI Circuits and System 
as well as their performance assessment criteria. The program includes a variety 
of detailed courses on Analog Circuits, Digital Circuits, Mixed -Signal Circuits, 
Synthesis, Verification and Testing. These courses address state -of-the art 
design methodologies as well as current trends in the industry such as high -
speed design issues and techniques.  
 
Specialization Core  
(8 credits) 
Specialization Elective  
(12 Credits) 
Artificial Intelligence / Advanced 
Machine Learning (3-0-0)  
Hardware Software Co-Design 
(3-0-2)
IoT Systems Architecture (1-0-0)
Embedded System (3-0-0)
Microsystems Fabrication Technology (2-0-2)
Sensors and Measurement (2-0-0)
Deep Learning (3-0-0)
Advance Machine Learning (3-0-0)
Advanced Artificial Intelligence (3-0-0)
Edge and Fog Computing (3-0-0)
Neuromorphic Computing and Design (3-0-0)
Analog and Interfacing Circuits (3-0-2)
Data Communication and Networking (2-0-2)
Resource Constrained AI (3-0-0)
Specialization Project [0-0-6] 
 Mobile and Pervasive Computing (3-0-0)    
 VANET(3-0-0)     
 Virtualization and Cloud computing (3-0-0)    
19 
 
Hardware Design for Artificial 
Intelligence 3-0-0 
Formal Verification 2-0-0 
Advanced VLSI Design and Lab 2-0-
2 
 
9 Smart Grid 
 
Society’s ability to utilize more renewable energy like wind and solar power is 
limited by the fact that our existing energy architecture was designed a century 
ago. The current system relies on large, centrally controlled power plants with 
predictable outputs. But wind and solar power fluctuates with environmental 
conditions, are difficult to control, and the power they generat e requires 
conversion. Adapting the existing grid to operate reliably with renewable 
energy sources is a complex task. A new architecture for power distribution, 
called the smart grid, is required to accommodate renewable energy.  
New technologies can have transformative impacts on remote communities that 
are not served by traditional power grids. Power distribution challenges are 
faced all over the world and the students should have an opportunity to receive 
training in advances in smart grid technology. 
 
Specialization Core  
(8 credits) 
Specialization Elective  
(12 Credits) 
Introduction to Smart Grid 3-0-0 
Renewable Energy Systems 3-0-0 
Power Quality 2-0-0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Power System Protection 3-0-0 
Power System Dynamics and 
Control 3-0-0 
HVDC & FACTS 3-0-0 
Power Systems Restructuring 3-
0-0 
Power Quality Mitigation 
Techniques 3-0-0 
Plugin Electric Vehicles 3-0-2 
Power System Reliability and 
Security 3-0-0 
Selected Topics in Distributed 
Generation 3-0-0 
Introduction to Cyber-Physical 
Systems 3-0-0
Specialization Project 0-0-3 
EEL7XX0 VLSI Broadband Communication 
Circuits [3-0-0]
EEL7XX0 VLSI Testing [2-0-0]
EEL7XX0 Hardware Software Co-Design 
[3-0-2]
CSL7XX0 Neuromorphic Computing and 
Design [3-0-0]
EEL7XX0 Image Sensor Design and 
Applications [3-0-0
Specialisation Project [0-0-6]
CSL7XX0 High Level Synthesis [3-0-0]
20 
 
12. Curriculum of B.Tech. inElectrical  Engineering  (Regular) 
 
Cat Course LTP CH NC GC Cat Course LTP C
H 
N
C 
G
C 
 I Semester   II Semester   
IE Introduction to 
Electrical 
Engineering 
3-0-2 5 - 4 IE Engineering 
Mechanics 
2-1-0 3 - 3 
IE Introduction to 
Computer Science 
3-0-2 5 - 4 IS Chemistry  3-0-0 3 - 3 
IE Introduction to 
Bioengineering 
3-0-2 5 - 4 IS Physics  3-0-0 3 - 3 
      IS Chemistry Lab 0-0-2 2 - 1 
      IS Physics Lab 0-0-2 2 - 1 
IS Mathematics I  3-1-0 4 - 4 IS Mathematics II 3-1-0 4 - 4 
IE Engineering 
Visualization 
0-0-2 2 - 1 IE Engineering 
Realization 
0-0-2 1 - 1 
NE Engineering Design 
I  
0-0-2 2 1 - NE Engineering 
Design II  
0-0-2 2 1 - 
NH Communication 
Skill I  
0-0-2 2 1 - NH Communication 
Skill II  
0-0-2 2 1 - 
NH Social Connect and 
responsibilities I 
0-0-1 1 0.5 - NH Social Connect 
and 
responsibilities 
II 
0-0-1 1 0.
5 
- 
NH Performing Arts I 
/Sports I  
0-0-1 1 0.5 - NH Performing Arts 
II/Sports II 
0-0-1 1 0.
5 
- 
Total 12-1-14 27 3 17 Total 11-2-12 2
5 
3 1
6 
 III Semester  IV Semester 
IE Materials Science & 
Engineering  
Fractal 1 – Energy 
Materials 
Fractal 2 – 
Magnetic Materials 
F3 – Computational 
Material Design 
3 ×  
1-0-0   
3 - 3 IE Pattern 
Recognition and 
Machine 
Learning 
3-0-2 5 - 4 
IE Signals and 
Systems 
3-1-0 4 - 4       
IE Thermodynamics 3-1-0 4 - 4  PC Circuit Theory 3-0-0 3 - 3 
LS                 
Probability, 
Statistics and 
Stochastic 
Processes 
3-1-0 4 - 
 
 
4 PC Engineering 
Electromagnetic
s 
3-0-0 3 - 3 
LS Foundations of 
Quantum 
Information 
Processing 
3-0-0 3 - 3 PC Digital Design 2-0-2 4  3 
21 
 
PC Data Structure and 
Algorithms 
3-0-2 5 - 4 PC Physical 
Electronics 
3-0-0 3  3 
NE Intro. To Profession  0-0-2 2 1  IH Humanities I 3-0-0 3 - 3 
            
- 1
9 
 V Semester  VI Semester 
PC Analog Circuits 3-0-3 6 - 4.5 PC Power 
Engineering 
3-0-3 6 - 4.
5 
PC Electrical Machines 3-0-0 3 - 3 PC Digital Signal 
PC Communication 
Systems 
3-0-0 3 - 3 PC Data 
Communication 
Networks 
3-0-0 3 - 3 
PC Computer 
Architecture 
3-0-0 3 - 3 PC Embedded 
Systems 
3-0-0 3 - 3 
PC Control Systems  3-0-3 6 - 4.5 PC Communication 
Systems Lab 
0-0-3 3 - 1.
5 
      PC Digital Systems 
Lab 
0-0-3 3 - 1.
5 
      PC Electrical 
Machines Lab 
0-0-3 3 - 1.
5 
IH Humanities II 3-0-0 3 - 3 PE Program/Open 
Elective 
3-0-0 3  3 
NH Professional Ethics 
I 
0-1-0  1 - NH Professional 
Ethics II 
0-0-2 2 1 - 
Total 18-1-6 24 1 21 Total 15-0-14 2
9 
1 2
1 
 VII Semester  VIII Semester 
PP B. Tech. Project  0-0-6 6 - 3 IH Humanities IV 3-0-0 3 - 3 
PE
/ 
OE 
               
Programme/Open 
Electives 
- - - 9 PE
/ 
OE 
Programme/Op
en Electives 
- - - 1
4 
IH Humanities III 3-0-0 3 - 3       
IS Environmental 
Science 
2-0-0 2 - 2       
Total 15-0-6 - - 17 Total 17-0-0 - - 1
7 
Total of Graded Credit - 1
5
0 
Total of Non-Graded Credit  9 - 
Non-Graded Design Credits 6 - 
Grand Total 165 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total 18-3-4 25 1 22 Total 17-0-4 2
1 
3-0-0 3 - 3 
Processing 
22 
 
14. Detailed Program Compulsory Course Contents 
 
Title Physical Electronics Number EEL2XXX 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. EE Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Quantum Mechanics   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide background knowledge of basic semiconductor and semiconductor component physics and to use 
relevant theoretical models for calculating properties and performance of semiconductor materials and 
components.  
2. Make students familiar with handling characterization of semiconductor components and circuits. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Describe the crystal structure and electronic band structure of the most common semiconductor materials, 
along with calculation of properties of semiconductors and charge transport. 
2. Explain the physics of p -n junction, the function and transport characteristics of the p -n diode, the bipolar 
transistor and the MOSFET transistor 
3. Describe metal -semiconductor junctions and semiconductor h etereojunctions and their application in 
electronic components 
 
Contents  
Foundation [8 Lectures]: 
Crystal structure, Review of quantum mechanics (3 L); 
Electrons in periodic lattices, E-k diagrams, Electrons, holes and phonons. Effective mass, intrinsic &  extrinsic 
semiconductors, free carrier and carrier concentration and Fermi-level (5 L). 
Charge Transport [4 Lectures]: Scattering and Drift, Mobility, Hall Effect, excess carriers. Surface recombination, 
electrostatic field and built-in electric field. 
PN junction [7 Lectures]: 
Electrostatics, equilibrium and depletion approximation. Reverse bias transition capacitance, breakdown in PN 
junctions (4L) 
PN junction under forward bias, minority carrier injection, DC current -voltage characteristics, Temperature  
effect (3L) 
Non-ideal diodes [5 Lectures]: Tunneling diodes, AC Analysis, charge storage and transient characteristics; 
Schottky barrier diodes,Ohmic contacts, Heterojunctions. 
Bipolar transistors [8 Lectures]: 
Derivation of I-V and current gain expressions, Equivalent circuits, Frequency response. (4 L); 
pnpn structures, Silicon controlled rectifier, thyristor, Gate turn-off thyristor, Insulated-Gate bipolar transistor 
(4 L). 
MOS Structure and Transistors [10 Lectures]: 
MOS capacitors, Flatband and threshold voltages (3 L);  
Static MOS transistor, I-V Characteristics, MOS transistor equivalent circuit, cutoff frequency (4 L);  
Body effect, Short Channel Devices, basic CMOS fabrication (3 L)  
 
Textbook  
1. Neamen, D. Biswas, D., (2017), Semiconductor Physics and Devices, 4th Edition, McGraw Hill  
2. Streetman, B. G., Banerjee S. K., (2015), Solid State Electronic Devices, 7th Edition, Pearson Education India 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Solid State Devices, NPTEL Course, Department of Metallurgical & Materials Engineering, Indian Institute 
of Technology Madras, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117106091/  
 
 
 
 
23 
 
Title Circuit Theory Number EEL2XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. EE Type Foundation course 
Prerequisite Signals and Systems   
Objectives  
The Instructor will : 
1. Teach the fundamentals of circuit elements and analyses. 
2. Teach the time and frequency domain analyses of circuits.  
3. Discuss the stability of a network. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Solve different electric circuit problems in time and frequency domain.   
2. Analyze various two port networks and their stabilities. 
 
Contents   
Review of fundamental circuit elements, sources, and theorems [4 Lectures]: Properties of resistor, capacitor, inductor, 
and various sources. Discussion and problem solving  on KVL, KCL, maximum power transfer theorem, 
compensation theorem, Thevenin and Norton theorems, Millman's theorem, Miller effect, Tellegen's theorem,  
graph theory approach of circuit analysis.    
Three phase systems [4 Lectures]: Three phase voltage and current, star -delta connections, line-to-line and phase 
quantities, balanced and unbalanced circuits and power measurements.  
Two port network analysis and synthesis [6 Lectures]:  
Representation of two port networks in terms of impedance ( Z) and admittance (Y) parameters, Transmission 
(ABCD) parameters, Hybrid ( h) parameters, g-parameters, Scattering ( S) parameters and their suitable 
applications (4L) 
Idea of reciprocal and symmetric networks. Equivalent network parameters of series and parallel connections 
of networks (2L) 
Analyses and synthesis of R-L-C networks [8 Lectures]:  
Analyses of R-L, L-C, R-C circuits under DC and AC excitations. Finding out initial conditions and the solution 
of differential equations associated with RLC circuits in time domain (4L)  
Network functions, Foster and Cauer synthesis, Helmholtz delay concept. (2L)  
Series and parallel resonances, Q-factors, selectivity (2L) 
 
Frequency domain analyses [8 Lectures]:  
Idea of complex frequency and s-domain. Time domain to frequency domain transformation (4L)  
Applications of Laplace and Fourier transforms in electric cir cuits. Poles and zeros of a network, Bode plot, 
stability analyses (4L) 
Filter synthesis [6 Lectures]:  
Filter definitions and specifications, basic L-C filter, lattice structure (2L) 
m-derived filter, Butterworth and Chebyshev filters, active filter(4L)   
 
N.B.  A total of six more class sessions will be included to solve numerical problems.  
 
Textbook  
1. V. Valkenberg, (2007), "Network Analysis," Prentice Hall International Edition  
2. D. Chattopadhyay and P.C. Rakshit, (2000), "Fundamentals of Electric Circuit Theory," S. Chand & Company 
3. C.K. Alexander and M.N.O. Sadiku, (2003) "Fundamentals of Electric Circuits," McGraw Hill.  
4. E. A. Guillemin, (1953) "Introductory Circuit Theory," John Wiley and Sons 
 
Self Learning Material  
1. MIT open course on "Circuits and Electronics," https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-
computer-science/6-002-circuits-and-electronics-spring-2007/.     
 
 
 
24 
 
Title Engineering Electromagnetics Number EEL2XXX 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. 2nd Year Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Electromagnetism and Optics   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Familiarize behavior of Electromagnetic wave propagation in different medium and its application to solving 
practical electromagnetic fields problems  
2. Provide basic understanding about transmission line and radiating systems for solving engineering 
electromagnetic problems 
3. Provide basic understanding of wave propagation used in practical wireless propagation systems.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Formulate and analyse problems involving lossy media with planar boundaries using uniform plane 
waves.  
2. Solve engineering problems involving transmission lines, metallic/dielectric waveguides.  
3. Obtain basic understanding of different radiating system s and be able to use these in the design of 
rudimentary wireless communications systems 
 
Contents  
Review of Maxwell’s equations [4 Lectures]: Review of Maxwell’s Equation, time-harmonic fields, scalar and vector 
potentials, boundary conditions, Uniform plane wave 
Plane waves at boundaries [5 Lectures]: Plane wave reflection and refraction at boundaries: Normal and oblique 
incidence, Brewster angle  
Plane waves in dispersive media [5 Lectures]:quarter wave matching, wave propagation in dispersive media  
Transmission Lines theory [5 Lectures]: Transmission line parameters and equations, Input impedance, standing 
wave ratio and power 
Transmission Lines application [5 Lectures]: Smith chart, Impedance matching, Applications of transmission lines, 
Transient on transmission lines  
Guided wave [5 Lectures]: TE, TM and TEM waves, parallel-plate waveguide  
Waveguides [5 Lectures]: rectangular and cylindrical waveguides, waveguide resonators, dielectric guides  
Antennas [8 Lectures]:  
Hertzian dipole, half -wave dipole  and quarter -wave monopole antennas, small loop antenna, antenna 
characteristics and arrays(5L) 
Wave propagation: Ground wave propagation, ionospheric propagation (3L) 
 
Textbook  
1. Hayt, W. H. & Buck, J. A.,(2015), Engineering Electromagnetics, 6th Edition, Tata McGraw-Hill  
2. Sadiku, M. N. O., (2015), Principles of Electromagnetics, 6th edition, Oxford University Press 
3. David K. Cheng, (1989), Fields and Waves Electromagnetics, 2nd edition, Pearson Education   
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Kumar P., Electromagnetic Theory, Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology 
Kanpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/104/108104087/# 
 
Preparatory Course Material  
Electromagnetics and Applications, Department of Electrical engineering and Computer Science, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, MIT OpenCourseWare, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-
engineering-and-computer-science/6-013-electromagnetics-and-applications-fall-2005/ 
  
 
 
 
 
25 
 
Title Digital Design Number EELXXX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–2 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech.  Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Introduction to Electrical Engineering   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide the fundamental concepts in digital logic and system design.  
2. Emphasize the modern design methodology to enable design practices using CAD tools. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. The students are expected to have the ability to Design and implement simple digital systems on FPGA 
boards.  
 
Contents  
Digital Logic Families, Voltage levels, Noise Margin, Power Dissipation, Fan-In, Fan-Out, CMOS Logic [3 lectures] 
Introduction to HDL, Design flow, Number representation, Arithmetic circuits: Fast Adders, Multipliers. [5 lectures]  
Gate delays, Transient output.[2 lectures] 
Multiplexers, Encoders, Decoders, Code Converters [5 lectures] 
Design and Analysis of Synchronous circuits, Memory Element in HDL, Counters and Shift Registers.[5 lectures]  
State Diagram, State Table, State Assignment and Reduction, Design of Finite State Machin es (Melay and Moore), 
Timing analysis [5 lectures] 
Programmable Logic Devices: PLA, PAL, CPLD, FPGA. Implementation with FPGA. [3 lectures]  
 
Lab Experiments on Designing Arithmetic circuits, Universal Shift Registers, Frequency Divide and Timing 
circuits, ALU, UART, Serial Peripheral Interface, VGA, Control Applications: Vending Machine, Traffic Light 
Controllers, Game Circuits, Motor Control. 
 
Textbooks 
1. Brown S. and Vranesic Z., (2013), Fundamentals of Digital Logic with Verilog Design, McGraw -Hill, 3rd 
Edition. 
2. Unsalan C., Tar B., (2017), Digital System Design with FPGA: Implementation Using Verilog and VHDL, 
McGraw-Hill Education. 
3. Mano M.M.,  Ciletti M.D., (2018), Digital Design: With an Introduction to the Verilog HDL, VHDL and 
System Verilog, Pearson. 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Roychoudhury, D., Digital Systems Design, Department of Electrical Communication Engineering, Indian 
Institute of Technology Kharagpur https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117/105/117105080/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26 
 
Title Analog Circuits Number  
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–3 [4.5] 
Offered for B. Tech Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Familiarize students with the concepts of analog circuits and give them a comprehensive overview of various 
amplifiers. 
2.  Deliver the knowledge of analog circuits by focusing on design and implementation.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Implement the concepts of CMOS Analog Design on real world problems and applications.  
2.  Design various analog circuits like single stage, differential amplifiers, operational amplifiers, filters for 
given specifications. 
 
Contents  
MOS Field-Effect Transistors: MOSFETs and its characteristics, operating modes [3 lectures]  
single stage amplifier, small signal equivalent circuits [5 lectures]  
Amplifier configurations [2 lectures] 
Concept of biasing, cascode and cascade amplifiers, current mirrors [5 lectures] 
Differential amplifiers: MOS differential pair, large and small signal analysis including common mode range 
and output swing, common mode rejection, passive and active loads [5 lectures]  
Frequency response of amplifiers: Fundamental concepts, High frequency model of transistors  
Frequency compensation, Miller’s theorem [5 lectures] 
Feedback: Negative feedback, Gain Desensitization, Bandwidth modification, Modification of I/O impedances, 
sense and Return techniques, Stability in feedback systems [5 lectures] 
Output Stages and Power Amplifiers: Basic stages, large signal considerations, class A, class B and class AB 
configurations, low drop out regulators [5 lectures] 
Operational Amplifiers: Op-Amp characteristics and specifications, concept of virtual ground [3 lectures]  
Inverting and non -inverting amplifiers, op -amp applications including voltage summer, integrator, 
differentiator, instrumentation amplifiers [4 lectures] 
 
Lab Experiments: It will include design and analysis of various analog circuits like single-stage amplifiers [3 
labs], differential amplifiers [2 labs], operational amplifiers and frequency compensation [3 labs], output 
stages [2 labs] for given specifications and applications. Students will be introduced with different circuit and 
design parameters like gain, bandwidth, ICMR, CMRR, PSRR, slew rate and others through DC, AC and 
transient analysis using SPICE simulations. It will also include implementation & characterisation of discrete 
off-the-shelf components using breadboard. 
 
Textbook  
1. Sedra, A. S., Smith, K. C., and Chandorkar, A. N., (2013), Microelectronic Circuits:  
International Version, 6th Edition, Oxford University Press 
2. Razavi, B., (2016), Design of Analog CMOS Integrated Circuits, 2nd Edition, McGraw-Hill Education. 
3. Gray, P. R, Hurst, P. J., Lewis, S. H., and Meyer, R. G., (2020), Design of Analog Integrated Circuits: 5 th 
Edition, Wiley 
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Nagendra Krishnapura, Analog Integrated Circuit Design, Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian 
Institute of Technology Madras, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/11710603 
 
 
 
 
 
27 
 
Title Electrical Machines Number EEL3XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech.  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Introduction to Electrical Engineering, 
Circuit Theory 
  
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
Provide understanding of construction, principle of operation, performance, and control of various electrical 
machines used in the industry using power electronic converters 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Analyze performance of different electrical machines 
2. Understand and develop converters and their control methodologies required for various electrical machines 
used in industry 
 
Contents  
Transformers [7 Lectures]:  
Three phase transformers- connections, testing, three winding transformers (5L)  
Auto transformers, tap-changing transformers (2L) 
Induction machines [12 Lectures]:  
Production of rotating magnetic field in three phase and two -phase ac machines-torque development- Types 
of IM-Equivalent circuit-Slip-torque characteristics (5L) 
Testing of 3-phase Induction motor -harmonic effects- Induction generator and its control (5L) 
Principle of operation of single phase induction motor and its equivalent circuit (2L)                                                                         
Synchronous machines [10 Lectures]:  
Principle-mathematical model of cylindrical and salient pole machines based on armature reaction (4L)  
Regulation, operation with infinite bus (4L)  
Synchronous motor- control (2L) 
DC motor control [4 Lectures]:  AC-DC and DC-DC converter topologies and their applications in control of DC 
motors 
Induction machine control [9 Lectures]:  
DC-AC and AC-AC converter topologies (4L)  
Their applications in constant torque, constant power and slip power control of induction machine (5L)  
 
Textbook 
1.  Sen, P.C., (2007), Principles of Electric Machines and Power Electronics, 2nd Edition, Wiley 
2.  Fitzgerald, A.E., Kingsley, C. Jr., Umans, S.D., (2003), Electrical  Machinery, 6th Edition, Tata McGraw-Hill 
3.  Dubey, G.K., (2001), Fundamentals of Electrical Drives, 2nd Edition, Alpha Science International Ltd  
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Bhuvaneswari, G.,  Electrical Machines, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian 
Institute of Technology Delhi 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/102/108102146/ 
2. Das,S.D., Fundamentals of Electric Drives,  NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical Engineering, 
Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/104/108104140/ 
3. Say, M.G., (1983), Alternating Current Machines, Pitman Publishing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28 
 
Title Control Systems Number EEL3XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–3 [4.5] 
Offered for B.Tech.  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Signals and Systems   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce Linear Time Invariant System. 
2. Teach design of linear feedback controller using time and frequency domain methods.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Analyze linear control system and to understand effect of feedback.  
2. Design linear controllers.  
 
Contents 
Mathematical modeling of physical systems [8 Lectures]:  
State variable and Transfer function representations; Examples of modeling different types (e. g. Electrical, 
mechanical, chemical, biological, social etc.) systems [3L] 
Duality between the elements of different types of systems.  Linearity and linearization, Transfer function and 
its interpretation in terms of impulse and frequency responses, Block -diagram and signal flow graph 
manipulations [5L ] 
Characterization of systems [7 Lectures]:   
Time domain response for first order and second order systems; Damping ratio and natural frequency; Effect 
of dominant poles and zeros on system response; Concept of system Stability, Routh array, [4L]  
Frequency domain response of LTI s ystem; peaking frequency, bandwidth; Link between time and frequency 
domain response indices.[3L] 
Analysis of Feedback [6 Lectures]:  
Sensitivity and complementary sensitivity function, Disturbance and noise reduction, [3L]  
Structured and unstructured plant uncertainties. Steady state errors and system types [3 Hours]  
Analysis of closed loop systems[13 Lectures]:  
Stabilityand relative stability [1L] 
Root-locus approach [5 L] 
Bode and Nyquist stability criterion [4L] 
PID and Lag-Lead Controller Design[3 L] 
State space modelling and state feedback control [8 Lectures]:  
State space modelling, [2L] 
Controllability and observability, [2L] 
State feedback and observer design [4L] 
 
Laboratory Classes (10-12 Classes) 
A few experiments will be conducted on simulation of different systems i.e. temperature control, power 
converter control using MATLAB as a tool. Experiments on servo position control, inverted pendulum, 
helicopter emulator system, Active suspension, Magnetic Levitation, coupled tank system .   
 
Textbooks  
1. Franklin, G.  F. ,  Powell, J.  D., and Emami -Naeini, A.  E.,(2002), Feedback Control of Dynamic Systems,  
Prentice Hall Inc.  
2. Nise, N., (2007), Control Systems Engineering, Wiley India 
3. Gopal, M., (2008),  Control Systems;  Tata McGraw Hill  
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Gopal, M.,  Control Engineering , NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian 
Institute of Technology  Delhi,   https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108102043/ 
 
 
 
29 
 
Title Communication Systems Number EEL3XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P[C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech. 3rd Year Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Signals and Systems, Fundamentals of Probability   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
Provide students an understanding of the concepts related to transmission and reception techniques for 
communications 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Analyze and design basic communications systems 
1. Compare and contrast the strengths and weaknesses of various communication techniques  
 
Contents  
Introduction to Communication Systems [6 lectures]:  
Basic building blocks and quality of service requirements of communication systems [2L],  
Channel and noise modelling, power spectral density of noise, noise through LTI systems [4L].  
Analog Modulation [4 lectures]:  
Need for modulation, Amplitude Modulation (AM), frequency division multiplexing, spectrum of AM [2L],  
Angle Modulation, spectrum of angle modulated signal [2L].  
Pulse Modulation [5 lectures]:  
The sampling theorem and time-division multiplexing [2L], 
Pulse modulation techniques, generation and detection of pulse modulation [3L].  
Digital Transmission at Baseband [12 lectures]:  
Quantization, pulse code modulation, line codes, spectral characteristics of line codes [4L],  
Matched filter receiver, inter-symbol interference, eye-patterns [4L],  
Nyquist’s criterion for ISI free transmission, equalization and OFDM [4L].  
Digital Transmission at Passband [15 lectures]:  
Binary digital modulation, QAM, signal constellation [4L],  
spectral characteristics of digital modulated signals [2L], 
digital receiver design - correlator receiver, optimal detectors [4L], 
bit error rate performance analysis over AWGN channels, power and bandwidth efficiency [5L] 
 
Textbook  
1. Haykin, S. and Moher, M. (2009), Communication Systems, 5th Edition, Wiley Press   
2. Lathi, B. P., Ding, Z., and Gupta, H. M. (2017), Modern Digital and Analog Communication Systems, 4th Edition, 
Oxford University Press 
3. Madhow, U., (2008), Fundamentals of Digital Communication, 1st Edition, Cambridge University Press 
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Jagannatham, A.,  Principles of Communication Systems I and II, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/104/108104091/ and https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/104/108104098/  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
Title Communication Systems Lab Number EEP3XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 0–0–3 [1.5] 
Offered for B. Tech.  Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Communication Systems   
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1.  Familiarize students with the generation and detection of analog modulated signals. 
2.  Expose students to end-to-end implementation of digital communication systems. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Design, implement and test modulator and demodulator for different types of communication s chemes. 
2.  Implement end-to-end digital communication systems over wireless links. 
 
Contents  
1. An introduction to measurement equipment like Signal Analyzer, AFG, Oscilloscope.  
2. Generation and detection of analog modulated signals. 
3. Study and implementation of phase locked loop. 
4. Generation and detection of pulse modulation schemes. 
5. Implementation of ISI channels and equalization. 
6. Generation and characterization of BPSK/QPSK modulated signals. 
7. Study and implementation of end-to-end communication system with digital modulation. (3) 
8. Demonstration of end-to-end optical communication systems (3) 
 
Textbook  
1. Haykin, S. and Moher, M. (2009), Communication Systems, 5th Edition, Wiley Press  
 
Reference Books  
1. Lathi, B. P., Ding, Z., and Gupta, H. M. (2017), Modern Digital and Analog Communication Systems, 4th Edition, 
Oxford University Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
31 
 
Title Power Engineering Number EE3XXX 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–3 [4.5] 
Offered for B.Tech.  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Electrical Machines, Engineering 
Electromagnetics 
  
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide an understanding of the functionalities of various components of the modern power system and 
their modelling 
2. Give exposure to modern power electronic converters to enhance the efficiency, economy, and controllability 
of the existing power system 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Model and evaluate the performance of a power system 
2. Propose converter topologies and their control strategies for enhancing the power system performance 
 
Contents  
Introduction [2 Lectures]: Structure of the conventional and modern power systems, conventional and renewable 
energy sources, load curve  
Mechanical aspects of overhead transmission line [4 Lectures]: The catenary curve, sag, and tension  
Modeling and performance of transmission lines [10 Lectures]: 
Conductor types, inductance and capacitance calculations (5L) 
Various models of transmission line representation (2L) 
Voltage regulation and effi ciency, power circle diagram, need for compensation to enhance the performance 
(3L) 
Representation and modeling of the power system [5 Lectures]: Single line diagram, substation layout, mathematical 
models of various components, impedance diagram, per-unit system, per-unit reactance diagram  
Underground cables [6 Lectures]: 
Construction, grading of cables, dielectric loss and charging effect (4L)  
Merits of underground cables, need of dc transmission (2L) 
Corona [4 Lectures]: Corona phenomena, critical disruptive voltage, corona loss, factors affecting corona loss  
Series and shunt compensation in transmission and distribution [5 Lectures]:  Principle of series and shunt 
compensation, introduction to series and shunt compensation devices  
Integration of renewable energy sources [6 Lectures]: 
Principles of solar PV and wind energy conversion- concept of MPPT in SPV and WE (4L) 
Converter topologies for grid integration techniques for solar PV and WE (2L)  
 
Laboratory Experiments 
Substation layout; estimation of transmission line parameters; performance of transmission lines with various 
models; reactive power compensation in transmission; power factor correction; testing of cables; 
implementation of series compensation; implementation of shunt compensation  
 
Textbook 
1. Stevenson,W.D.Jr., (1982), Elements of Power System Analysis, McGraw Hill International  
2. Wadhwa,C.L., (2010), Electrical Power Systems, New Age International Publishers  
3. Bollean,M.H.J., Hasan,F., (2011), Integration of Distributed Generation in the Power Systems, Wiley India 
Press 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Sinha,A.K.,  Power System Analysis,  NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical Engineering, IIT 
Kharagpur,     https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/105/108105067/ 
2. Das, D., Power System Analysis , NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical Engineering, IIT 
Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117105140/  
 
 
32 
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide students an understanding of analysis and synthesis of algorithms and systems that process discrete 
time signals, with emphasis on realization and implementation  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. interpret and process discrete/digital signal and systems 
2. analyze and provide solutions to practical implementation issues of DSP systems  
 
Contents  
Review of Discrete Time signals: Sequences, Discrete time processing of continuous time signals, Practical 
Sampling and reconstruction, sampling of band-pass signals; Discrete systems: attributes, DTFT, z-transform, 
Inverse systems (3 lectures) 
Computation of the Discrete Fourier transform (9 lectures): 
The discrete Fourier transform (DFT), Sampling of the discrete time Fourier transform, properties of the DFT, 
linear convolution using the DFT (5 lectures) 
Fourier analysis of the signals using the DFT, Direct computation of the DFT, Decima tion-in-time FFT 
algorithms, Decimation-in-frequency FFT algorithm (4 lectures) 
Design of FIR filters (8 lectures): 
FIR filters with linear phase (2 lectures) 
Design of FIR filters by windowing (2 lectures) 
Park-McClellan’s method, Direct and Cascade form structures for FIR filters (4 lectures) 
Design of IIR filters (14 lectures): 
Introduction to IIR filter design, Design of continuous time low pass filters (3 lectures)  
Transformation of continuous time filters to discrete time filters (3 lectures)  
Design examples for low pass IIR filters, Frequency transformations of low pass filters. (5 lectures)  
Cascade, Parallel, Cascade-Parallel and Lattice structures for IIR filters (3 lectures) 
Multirate signal processing (5 lectures):  
Sampling rate conversion, implementation of Multirate systems, filter design for Multirate systems (2 
lectures) 
Noble identities, Type I & II polyphase representation, concept of Perfect Reconstruction Filter Banks  
(PRFB)  (3 lectures) 
Finite wordlength effects: Number representati on, quantization of filter coefficients, Effects of finite 
wordlength on digital filters. (3 lectures) 
 
Reference Books  
1. Proakis, J. G. and Manolakis, D.G. (2007) Digital Signal Processing, 4th Edition Prentice Hall  
2. Mitra, S. K., (2008) Digital Signal Processing, 3nd Edition, McGraw Hill  
3. Manolakis, D.G., and Ingle, V. (2011) Applied Digital Signal Processing,  1st Edition, Cambridge University 
Press 
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Basu, T. K., Digital Signal Processing, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical Engineering, 
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108105055/  
2. Dutta Roy, S. C., Digital Signal Processing, Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of 
Technology Delhi, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117/102/117102060/ 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Jagannatham, A. K., Principles of Signals and Systems , NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108104100/ 
 
Title Digital Signal Processing Number EEL3XXX 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Signal and Systems   
33 
 
Title Data Communication Networks Number EEL3XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech.  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Communication Systems   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide background to understand the network protocols and architectures  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Model data networks and analyze their performance  
2. Understand the issues and design the next-generation data networks 
 
Contents  
Introduction [2 lectures]: Introduction to data communication, layered architecture. 
Data Link Control [8 lectures]: 
Measure of information, entropy, source coding [3L], 
Error detection: linear block code examples, cyclic redundancy check [3L],  
Retransmission strategies: ARQ protocols, framing [2L]. 
Delay models in Data Networks [8 lectures]:  
Introduction to Queueing theory, Little’s theorem, different queueing systems [4L],  
Priority queueing, Burke’s theorem, network of queues [4L]. 
Multi-access Communication [10 lectures]:  
Random access techniques, tree algorithms [4L]  
FDMA, TDMA, CDMA [4L] 
Reservation, polling, token ring and buses, High speed LANs [2L]  
Circuit Switching and packet switching [3 lectures]: Circuit-switched networks, packet switching principles, 
introduction to switch architecture, high speed switch scheduling 
Routing in Data Networks [6 lectures]:  
Spanning trees, shortest path routing [3L]  
Broadcast routing, optimal routing [3L] 
Flow and congestion control [2 lectures]: Window/Credit Schemes, Rate based schemes. 
TCP/IP and ATM [3 lectures]: TCP operation, TCP error, flow and congestion control, ATM reference 
architecture, transmission of ATM cells, ATM adaptation layer, traffic and congesti on control. 
 
Textbook  
1. Bertsekas, D. P. and Gallager, R. G., (1992), Data Networks, 2nd Edition, Prentice Hall  
2. Stallings, W., (2007), Data and Computer Communications, 8th Edition, Pearson 
3. Forouzan, B. A., (2007), Data Communication and Networking, 4th Edition, McGraw Hill 
 
Reference Book 
1. Tanenbaum, A.S. and Wetheral, D.J.  (2011), Computer Networks, 5th Edition, Pearson  
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Modiano, E.,  Data Communication Networks,  MIT OpenCourseWare, Electrical Engineering & Computer 
Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-
computer-science/6-263j-data-communication-networks-fall-2002/index.htm 
2. Pal, A.,  Data Communication, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, 
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur,https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106105082/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
34 
 
Title Embedded Systems Number EEL3XX 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Core 
Prerequisite Basics of Computer Architecture   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce concepts of different architectures and programming languages of embedded processors.  
2. Introduce concepts of Real time system and design of embedded systems.   
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Program and to design embedded system using embedded processors based on system specifications.  
2. Use different IDE and debugging tools.    
 
Contents  
Architecture of ARM Cortex M3 and Cortex A series processors; [5L] 
Introduction to Embedded Multicore Architecture; Multicore Processor Design Technique; Interconnection 
networks for Multicore Processors; [5L] 
Programmable Systems on Chip; Architecture of DSPs; Fixed and Floating point devices; Security at Hardware 
level [5L]   
Selection of DSP chips; Performance assessment of embedded processor [2L]  
Programming of Embedded processors using assembly and C; [5L] 
Models for program --data flow graphs; Programming of multicore processors; Assembly language 
programming of ARM Cortex M3;[4L]  
Hardware software co-design; [2L] 
Processes and real time operating systems; Multi-rate system;[2L]  
Real time scheduling algorithms e.g. RMA, EDF and their variants; [4 L]  
Energy efficient scheduling algorithms; Structure of Real Time operating system; Overhead of RTOS; [4L] 
Example of Real time operating systems e.g. real time Linux, Keil RTX Real -Time Operating System , 
programming of embedded processors with RTOS   [4L ] 
 
Text Books  
1. Wolf, M., (2014), High Performance embedded Computing: Applications in Cyber Physical Systems and 
Mobile Computing, Elsevier 
2. JoshephYiu, (2013), The definitive Guide to ARM Cortex M3 and M4 Proces sors, Elsevier. 
3. Buttazzo, G., (2011), “Hard Real-Time Computing Systems: Predictable Scheduling Algorithms and 
applications, Springer  
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Chaudhury,S., Introduction to Embedded Computing , NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108102045/# 
 
PreparatoryCourse Material 
1. Wolf, M., “Computers as Components: Principles of Embedded Computing System Design” Third Edition, 
Elsevier 2012.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
Title Digital Systems Lab Number EEP3XX 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 0–0–3  
Offered for B.Tech.  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Computer Architecture   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide knowledge of hardware/software tools and interfacing of embedded processor  
2. Provide knowledge of programming of embedded Processor 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Use IDEs for writing software for embedded processors. 
2. Design and test embedded systems for different application. 
 
Contents  
Experiments on Configuration of RTOS, booting sequence; evaluating scheduler responsiveness; using 
different peripherals like GPIO, Timers, I 2C bus etc. Operating System for IoT devices; Platform for 
heterogenousIoT devices; Experiments on simulators of Computer Architecture.  
 
Textbook 
1. Xiao, P., (2018), Designing Embedded Systems and the Internet of Things (IoT) with the ARM®Mbed™, 
John Wiley & Sons Ltd 
2. Norris, D., (2018) Programming with STM32: Getting Started with the Nucleo Board and C/C++, 
McGraw Hill 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
36 
 
Title Electrical Machines Lab Number EEP3XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 0–0–3 [1.5] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Electrical Machines   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide practical exposure on operation, testing and performance evaluation of various electrical machines 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Test, determine the parameters and evaluate the performance of various electrical machines  
 
Contents  
Laboratory Experiments 
Experiments related to the following topics will be conducted: 
Testing of transformers, parallel operation of transformers, load test of transformers, separation of losses, 
three phase connections, converter based three phase induction motor speed control, performance 
predetermination of induction motor, lo ad test of induction motor, regulation of alternator, performance of 
alternator connected to infinite bus, slip test, parallel operation of induction generator with ac grid, speed 
control of DC motor using converters  
 
Textbook  
1. Say,M.G., (1983), Alternating Current Machines, Pitman Publishing 
2. Fitzgerald,A.E., Kingsley,C.Jr., Umans,S.D., (2003), Electrical Machinery, 6th Edition, Tata McGraw-Hill 
3. Dubey,G.K., (2001), Fundamentals of Electrical Drives, 2nd Edition, Alpha Science International Ltd 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
37 
 
15. Detailed Course Content of Programme Elective Courses 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Communications 
 
 
 
 
  
38 
 
Title Information Theory and Coding Number EEL3XX0 
Department EE L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Communication Systems, Basics of Probability   
Objectives  
The Instructor will describe mathematical principles of communication that govern the compression and 
transmission of data and the design of efficient methods of doing so 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Formulate the fundamental concepts of information theory such as entropy, mutual information, channel 
capacity 
2. Elaborate the principles of source coding and data transmission 
3. Apply information theoretic methods to communication systems 
 
Contents  
Mathematical definition of information and the study of its properties [8 Lectures]:   
Measure of information, entropy, entropy rate, relative entropy, differential entropy (4 Lectures)  
Jensen’s inequality, data processing inequality,  Fano’s inequality (4 Lectures)  
Source coding [4 Lectures]:  Efficient representation of message sources- AEP, Shannon-Fano-Elias, arithmetic 
coding.  
Communication channels and their capacity [7 Lectures]:   
Mutual information, information channel capacity (3 Lectures) 
Channel coding theorem (4 Lectures) 
Coding for reliable communication over noisy (Gaussian) channels. (5 Lectures)  
Gaussian multi-user communications [8 Lectures]:   
Parallel Gaussian channels (2 Lectures) 
Multiple access channels (3 Lectures)  
Broadcast channels (3 Lectures) 
Lossy source coding: approximate representation of message sources. (5 Lectures)  
Information Theory and statistics (5 Lectures) 
 
Textbook  
Cover, T. M., and Thomas, J. A. , (2006), Elements of Information Theory, Wiley 
 
Reference Book 
1. Abramson, N., (1963), Information Theory and Coding, 1st Ed., McGraw -Hill Book Company Inc.   
2. C. E. Shannon, (1948), A Mathematical Theory of Communications, Bell System Technical Journal  
 
Self Learning Material  
Merchant, S. N.,   Information Theory and Coding,  NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/117101053/    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
39 
 
Title Spread Spectrum Communications Number EEL4XX0 
Department EE L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Communication Systems   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
Present an analysis of the performance and design of spread-spectrum communication systems 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Perform analysis on the performance of spread spectrum modulation formats.  
2. Analyze the performance of spread spectrum systems in the presence of interference.  
3. Analyze the performance of spreading code acquisition and tracking systems.  
 
Contents  
Types of spread spectrum systems [ 7 Lectures]: direct sequence (2 Lectures), frequency hopping (2 Lectures),  
time hopping (2 Lectures),  chirp and hybrid methods, OFDM-SS (3 Lectures) 
Sequences for spread spectrum communication: features, properties and generation methods (5 lectures)  
Initial code acquisition: techniques and performance analysis (5 lectures) 
Code tracking: techniques and performance analysis (5 lectures) 
Analytical Performance of spread spectrum systems (5 lectures) 
Spread spectrum systems in jamming environments (5 lectures) 
Low probability of intercept methods (5 lectures) 
Spread spectrum and electronic counter measure (5 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Dixon, R. C., (2010), Spread spectrum Systems, Wiley 
2. Simon, M. K., Omura, J. K., Scholtz, R. A. and Levitt, B. K., (2002), Spread Spectrum Communications 
Handbook, McGraw Hill 
3. Torrieri, D., (2015), Principles of Spread Spectrum Communication Systems, Springer  
 
Self Learning Material  
Sen, D.,  Spread Spectrum Communications and Jamming,  NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electronic 
and Communication Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/117105136/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
Title Optical Communication Systems Number EEL4XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P[C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech.  Type Elective  
Prerequisite Communication Systems, Engineering Electromagnetics   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
Provide students an understanding of the concepts related to transmission and reception techniques for 
optical communication systems 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Analyze and design basic optical communications systems 
2. Compare and contrast the features of various optical communication techniques  
 
Contents  
Introduction to Optical Communication Systems [2 lectures]:  
Basic building blocks, optical transmitters, optical receivers, optical amplifiers  [2L]. 
Optical transmission system considerations [8 lectures]:  
Attenuation, dispersion, line coding schemes, eye pattern [4L]  
Noise effects, attenuation and dispersion limited link design, pulse on pedestal power penalty  [4L] 
Modulation and Detection Techniques [12 lectures]:  
Optical modulation techniques, Intensity Modulation/Direct Detection system, SIM [4L]  
Coherent Optical Systems, homodyne and heterodyne detection [3L] 
BER performance in coherent and non-coherent modulation schemes [5L] 
Optical modulators [8 lectures]:  
Electro-Optic and Acousto Optic [4L]  
Tunable optical filters (grating filters, micro-ring resonators) [4L] 
Channel Impairments [12 lectures]:  
Optical fiber considerations-Pulse broadening [2L]  
Free space effects -turbulence model s, weather conditions viz. fog, haze, drizzle [3L] under -water 
impairments [2L]  
Performance analysis: BER analysis under channel impairments, link budget, channel capacity [5L]  
 
Textbook  
1. Keiser, G. (2017), Optical Fiber Communications, 5 th Edition, McGraw Hill 
2. Chadha, D. (2013), Terrestrial Wireless Optical Communications, 1 st Edition, McGraw Hill.  
3. Chen A. and Murphy, E. (2011), Broadband Optical Modulators: Science, Technology and Applications, 1 
st Edition, CRC Press. 
  
Self Learning Material  
Kumar, K. P.,  Fiber-Optic Communication Systems and Techniques, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/104/108104113/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
41 
 
Title Satellite Communications  Number EEL4XX 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Communication Systems, Data Communication 
Networks 
  
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide an overall understanding of satellite communication systems, technologies and techniques and will 
equip them with the design tools for communication payload design. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Explain the structure, techniques and technology for satellite communication systems. 
2.  Design and plan satellite communication links for a prescribed quality of service.  
 
Contents  
Introduction of satellite systems [11 Lectures]:    
Services, frequency planning, space segment components, earth stations (5L) 
Bus and payloads, antennas and coverage (3L)  
Transparent and non-transparent transponders (3L) 
Satellite Systems Planning [16 Lectures]:    
Free space loss, EIRP, noise sources, noise temperature, sky noise G/T ratio (5L)  
C/N calculation for uplink and downlink (2L) 
Modulation, Demodulation and BER Analysis for APSK, OQPSK, CPFSK (5L)  
Intermodulation, back-off, interference and C/I calculation (4L)  
Multiple Access in Satellite systems [7 Lectures]:    
Fixed and demand assignment, traffic matrices mapping (3L)  
FDMA & TDMA operation, MF TDMA operation (4L)  
Satellite system Future Trends [8 Lectures]:    
Standards issues and technology developments: BSM, DVB-S2, Satellite UMTS (5L)  
A state -of-the art up date on current innovations and new systems proposals: Hybrid Satellite -Terrestrial 
Communications (3L) 
 
Textbook  
1. Maral, G., Sun, Z., and Bousquet, M., (2009), Satellite Communications Systems: Systems, Techniques 
and Technology, Wiley & Sons 
2. Roddy, D., (2017), Satellite Communications, McGraw Hill Education 
3. Pratt, T., Bostian, C. W., and Allnutt, J., (2003), Satellite Communications, John Wiley & Sons  
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Bandyopadhyay, K.,  Satellite Communication Systems, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electronic 
and Communication Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/117105131/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
42 
 
Title Cellular Communication Networks  Number EEL4XX 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Communication Systems, Data Communication 
Networks 
  
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide an understanding of fundamental issues related to frequency planning, resource allocation and 
interference management techniques in cellular communication networks.  
2. Introduce concepts and techniques used in existing and emerging cellular communication systems.    
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Analyze and design operational cellular communications networks.  
2. Compare and contrast the strengths and weaknesses of various cellular communication networks.  
 
Contents   
Introduction of cellular systems[9 Lectures]:  
Channel models and impairments (5L) 
Quality of service requirements, coverage planning (4L) 
Interference management techniques[12 Lectures]:  
Interference avoidance and interference cancellation(5L) 
Interference alignment (4L) 
Interference coordination – network MIMO  (3L) 
User and Resource Management [9 Lectures]:  
Association and handover management (4L) 
Transmit power control (5L) 
Emerging Cellular Network Technologies[12 Lectures]:  
Long Term Evolution (4L) 
Long Term Evolution Advanced (3L) 
5G technologies and beyond(5L) 
 
Textbook  
1. Miao, G., Zander, J., Sung, K., & Ben Slimane, S., (2016), Fundamentals of Mobile Data Networks, 
Cambridge University Press 
2. Rappaport, T. S., (2010), Wireless Communications – Principles and Practice, Pearson 
3. Bolcskei, H., Gesbert, D., Papadis, C. B., and Veen, A. V., (2006), Space -time Wireless Systems, Cambridge 
Press.  
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Koilpillai, D.,  Introduction to Wireless and Cellular Communications,  NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106/106/106106167/ 
2. ETSI 5G Technologies https://www.etsi.org/technologies/5g 
 
 
 
  
43 
 
Title Microwave engineering Number EEL4XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech Type Elective 
Prerequisite Engineering Electromagnetics   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide theoretical background to analyze microwave circuits and systems  
2.  Provide design principle of several commonly used microwave devices and sources  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Have basic understanding of different techniques related to microwave circuits and systems  
2.  Design basic microwave components and antennas 
 
Contents  
Transmission lines: Review of wave equation and transmission line [5 Lectures]: stripline, micro-stripline; slotline; 
coplanar waveguide line; Wave propagation in planar lines: design, effective dielectric constant, attenuation, 
dispersion, power-handling capability  
Impedance matching [3 Lectures]: Design of distributed circuits usin g planar lines, single and double stub 
matching, LC and multisection impedance matching network 
Network analysis [5 Lectures]: scattering-matrix, representation, properties, shift in reference planes, 
generalized S-matrix; Signal flow graph; basics of network analyzer 
Passive components [5 Lectures]: power splitters/combiners, directional couplers, Operation and S -matrices of 
resonators/cavities 
Non-reciprocal components[3 Lectures]:  isolators and circulators 
Microwave filters [5 Lectures]: image parameter  method; insertion loss method low pass filter prototype of 
Butterworth & Chebyshev response; filter transformation - impedance and frequency scaling, filter 
implementation - Richards transformation, Kuroda identities 
Microwave Antennas [5 Lectures]: Planar dipole and monopole antenna,  folded dipole, Microstrip antenna, 
introduction to slot antenna  
Microwave broadband Antennas [3 Lectures]: Yagi-uda antenna, log-periodic antenna, helical antenna, biconical 
antenna, introduction to reflector antenna  
Microwave solid state devices [4 Lectures]: RF diodes and transistors, IMPATT, Schottky, PIN diodes, HEMT 
Device  
Microwave sources [4 Lectures]:  Gunn Diode, klystron, magnetron  
 
Textbook  
1. D. M. Pozar, (2011), "Microwave Engineering," 4th ed. New York, NY, USA, Wiley 
2. David K. Cheng, (1989), Fields and Waves Electromagnetics, 2nd edition, Pearson Education   
3. Balanis C. A., (2016), Antenna Theory, Analysis and Design, 4th edition, Wiley Press 
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Kumar, G.,  Microwave Theory and Techniques , Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of 
Technology Bombay, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108101112/ 
2. Vedio Lecture: Antenna Engineering, Dr. Anthony F erraro, Penn State Univ., 
USA,http://www.engr.psu.edu/cde/courses/ee438/index.htm 
 
Preparatory Course Material  
1. Electromagnetics and Applications, Department of Electrical engineering and Computer Science, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, MIT OpenCourseWare, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-
engineering-and-computer-science/6-013-electromagnetics-and-applications-fall-2005/ 
 
 
 
 
 
44 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Signal Processing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
45 
 
Title Signal Compression Number EE4XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Program Elective 
Prerequisite Signal and Systems, Probability and Statistics   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
Provide background in fundamental signal compression techniques such as lossless and lossy 
techniques for different types of signals. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. compress various type of signals such as audio and image  
2. analyze the trade-off between compression, computational or implementational demand and quality of 
reconstructed signal.   
 
Contents  
Introduction to Signal Compression [5 Lectures]: Information and Entropy, Distortion Measures such as 
PSNR, mutual-information, divergence, and Kullback-Liebler number 
Lossless and Lossy Coding [9 Lectures]: Huffman Coding, Arithmetic Coding, adaptive and predictive 
lossless coding (5 Lectures) 
Subband Coding, QMF bank. (4 Lectures) 
Quantization [7 Lectures]: Uniform and non-uniform Quantization, Vector Quantization, Structured Vector 
Quantization, Product Vector Quantization (4 Lectures) 
Differential Coding, Delta Modulation. (3 Lectures) 
Transform Coding [7 Lectures]:  
Wavelets, Multi Resolution Analysis (4 Lectures) 
Compression using DCT, DWT, KLT (3 Lectures)  
Representation Based Techniques [6 Lectures]: Sparse Representation, Dictionary Learning Based 
Approaches (4 Lectures) 
Machine Learning based Compression (2 Lectures) 
Compression Standards [8 Lectures]:  
JPEG, JPEG 2000 (4 Lectures) 
H264, MPEG. (4 Lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Sayood, Khalid, (2017). Introduction to data compression. Morgan Kaufmann.  
2. Gersho, Allen, and Robert M. Gray, (2012). Vector quantization and signal compression. Vol. 159. Springer 
Science & Business Media. 
3. Salomon, David, and Giovanni Motta (2010). Handbook of data compression. Springer Science & Business 
Media. 
 
Self Learning Material  
Prof. Ajit Rajwade, Digital Image Processing, Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of 
Technology Bombay, https://www.cse.iitb.ac.in/~ajitvr/CS663_Fall2018/ 
 
Preparatory Course Material:   
Prof. S.C. Dutta Roy, Digital Signal Processing, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117/102/117102060/  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46 
 
Title Speech Processing Number EEL4xxx 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech.  Type Program 
Elective  
Prerequisite Signal and Systems, Probability and Stochastic 
Processes 
  
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. introduce the theory of signal processing applications on speech, to give information about human speech 
production and perception, voice production mechanism, and human perception systems. 
2. provide an understanding of time frequency analysis of speech, Linear Prediction, speech 
analysis/synthesis. 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. analyze digital signals, e.g., audio signals, in the time, frequency and joint time-frequency domains 
2. implement widely-used algorithms for speech analysis and speech processing in the frequency or 
time domain.  
 
Contents 
Introduction [6 Lectures]: Review of DSP basics, Filters, DFT, Short-time Fourier Transform, Spectrograms, 
Speech Production, Articulatory and Acoustic Phonetics 
Time Domain Analysis [16 Lectures]:  
Introduction to time series, probability models for time series, stationarity (5 Lectures)   
Moving average (MA), Autoregressive (AR), ARMA and ARIMA models, Estimating the autocorrelation 
function and fitting ARIMA models. (6 Lectures) 
Linear Prediction, Perceptually Based Linear Predictive Analysis, DPCM (5 Lectures)    
Cepstral Analysis [6 Lectures]: Time and frequency domain features, Cepst ral Analysis, Mel Cepstral 
Analysis,  MFCC, Wavelets. 
Hearing Perception [4 Lectures] 
Applications [10 Lectures]: 
Compression, Recognition, Noise Suppression (5 Lectures) 
Music Event Classification, speech generation. (5 Lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Rabiner, L. and Schafer, R., (2011), Theory and Applications of Speech Processing, Pearson.  
2. Rabiner, L. and Schafer, R., (2007), Introduction to Digital speech Processing, Publishers Inc.  
3. Gold, B., and Morgan, N., (2011), Speech and Audio Signal Processing, John Wiley . 
 
Self Learning Material 
Prof. Alan W Black, Speech Processing, Carnegie Mellon University, http://www.speech.cs.cmu.edu/15 -
492/ 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Prof. S.C. Dutta Roy, Digital Signal Processing, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117/102/117102060/  
 
 
 
  
47 
 
 
Title System Identification Number EE4XXX 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Program Elective 
Prerequisite Signals and Systems, 
Basics of Probability  
  
Objectives 
The Instructor will provide students an understanding of system identification techniques and its applications.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to apply the learned techniques to solve practical problems such 
as echo cancellation, active noise cancellation, and deconvolution. 
 
Contents  
Introduction to System Identification [5 Lectures]: What is System Identification? How can we derive 
Algorithms? How do we evaluate the Algorithms? Stochastic vs. Non-stochastic Formulation.  
Nonparametric Identification [5 Lectures]: Impulse and Step Response, Correlation Methods, Spectral 
Analysis  
Parameter Estimation [12 Lectures]:  
Minimizing Prediction Error, Identifiability, Consistency, Biase (4 Lectures)  
Least Squares Relations between Minimizing the Prediction Error and the MLE, MAP   
(4 Lectures)  
Convergence and Consistency, Asymptotic Distribution of Parameter Estimates, The Instrumental -Variable 
Method (4 Lectures) 
Algorithms [8 Lectures]:  
Computing the Estimates, Recursive Estimation (5 Lectures) 
Kalman Filter Interpretation (3 Lectures) 
Identification in Practice [7 Lectures]:  
Aliasing due to Sampling, Closed Loop Data, Model Order Estimation (3 Lectures)  
Bounded but Unknown Disturbances, Identification in the Worst Case, Optimal Algorithms, Optimal Inputs, 
Robustness Consideration (4 Lectures) 
 
Applications [5 Lectures]: Echo Cancellation, Active Noise Cancellation, Deconvolution, Dehazing.  
 
Reference Books  
1. Ljung, Lennart (1998). System Identification: A Theory for the User. 2nd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice 
Hall. 
2. Keesman, K. J. (2011). System identification: an introduction. Springer Science & Business Media.  
 
Self Learning Material  
Prof. Arun K.Tangirala , System Identification, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/106/103106149/ 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Prof. V.M. Gadre, Signals and Systems, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electronics and 
Communication Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117/101/117101055/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
48 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Control Engineering 
  
49 
 
Title Modern Control Number EEL3XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0[3] 
Offered for B.Tech.  Type Elective  
Prerequisite Control Systems   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce time domain modeling of SISO and MIMO systems. 
2. Teach design of feedback controller using different time domain techniques.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. To analyze linear control system and to understand effect of feedback.  
2. To design controllers and Observers using different techniques for SISO and MIMO systems.   
 
Contents:  
Review of state space modeling technique, Solution of stat e space equation, State transition matrix; 
Linearization of nonlinear equations [4 Lectures] 
 
Discrete time system and difference equation representation of discrete time systems; solution of difference 
equation [4 Lectures] 
 
Vector spaces and Linear operators [6 Lectures]: Definition of linear operators; Operator Norms; Adjoint 
Operator; rotational operators 
 
Functions of Vectors and Metrices [6 Lectures]:  Linear and multilinear functionals; quadratic forms; Bilinear 
forms as inner products; functions of matrices; Cayley Hamilton Theorem  
 
System Stability [5 Lectures]: Lypunov Stability; classification of Equilibria; Lypunov’s direct method; 
Relationship between different stability  
 
Controllability and Observability [4 Lectures]: PBH test for controllability; decomposing system into controllable 
and uncontrollable subspaces;  
 
Modal Controllability and Observability; Controllability and reahbility for discrete time systems; 
Observability and reconstructability [5 Lectures] 
 
State feedback and observer design [8 Lectures]:  
State feedback controller for SISO system; Multivariable canonical forms and state feedback controller design 
(4L) 
Reduced order and full order observer design (4L) 
 
Textbooks  
1. John Bay (2008), Fundamentals of Linear State Space Systems; McGraw Hill.    
2. Slotine, Jean-Jacques, and Weiping Li, (1991) Applied Nonlinear Control, Prentice -Hall. 
3. Brogan, William L(1991), Modern Control Theory, 3/e, Prentice-Hall, I991. 
   
  
50 
 
 
Title Nonlinear and Adaptive Control Number EEL4XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0[3] 
Offered for B.Tech.  Type Elective  
Prerequisite Control Systems   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce nonlinear and adaptive control systems. 
2. Teach design and analysis of feedback controllers for nonlinear systems in the presence of uncertainties. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. To analyze Nonlinear control systems. 
2. To design controllers and Observers in the presence of uncertainty.   
 
Contents:  
Introduction to Nonlinear Systems:  
Nonlinear models and nonlinear phenomena, Examples of nonlinear systems, [3 L]  
Concept of equilibrium points, Limit cycles [3 L]  
Small gain theorem, sector-based nonlinearities, Circle/Popov criteria [2 L] 
 
Stability Results:  
Lyapunov stability results, Barbalat's lemma, Krasovskii-LaSalle principle, Passivity theorems [7 L] 
Feedback linearization. [3 L] 
 
Reinforcement learning based control:  
Basics of Reinforcement learning technique, policy iteration, value iteration [3 L] 
Adaptive dynamic programming, Persistent Excitation. [4 L] 
Neural network, online adaptive dynamic programming, online policy and value iteration, actor -critic 
method. [5 lectures] 
 
Model predictive Control (MPC):  
Understanding MPC problem and advantages, Control and prediction horizon,  Controller design [5 L]  
Application of Adaptive Controller. [4 L]  
 
Textbooks   
1. Hassan K Khalil, (2002) Nonlinear systems, Prentice hall 
2. Kumpati S Narendra, Anuradha M Annaswamy, (2012), Stable adaptive systems, Courier Corporation 
3. Francesco Borrelli, Alberto Bemporad, Manfred Morari, (2017), Predictive control for linear and hybrid 
systems, Cambridge University Press 
 
Research Paper 
1. Frank L Lewis and DragunaVrabie, Reinforcement learning and adaptive dynamic programming for 
feedback control, IEEE circuits and systems magazine, 2009.  
 
  
51 
 
Title Robust and Optimal Control Number EEL4XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0[3] 
Offered for B.Tech.  Type Elective  
Prerequisite Control Systems   
Objectives  
The Instructor will introduce various optimal and robust control techniques for feedback control systems. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. To design and analyze feedback control systems in the presence of uncertainties. 
2. To design optimal controllers for linear and nonlinear systems.   
 
Contents 
Preliminaries 
Vector spaces and Linear operators, Review of state space modeling technique, Solution of state space 
equation, Euler-Lagrange equation [3 Lectures ] 
Controllability and Observability, State feedback controller, Observer.  [5 Lectures]  
 
Stability Results 
Optimal Control Theory: Lyapunov stability, Routh-Hurwitz criterion,  Nyquist criterion, Stabilizability 
and Detectability, [5 Lectures] 
 
Optimal Control Theory 
Principle of Optimality, Hamiltonian-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) equation, LQR, Kalman filter, Relation 
between LQR and Kalman filter. [5 Lectures] 
 
Robust control for Linear and Nonlinear Systems 
Uncertainty classifications, Matched and mismatched uncertainties, Uncertainty in input matrix [4 
Lectures] 
Optimal control approach for robust controller design, Stability analysis of uncertain systems.  [5 
Lectures] 
 
Kharitonov approach,  H2 and H∞ Control: Function space, Computation of H2 and H∞ norm [5 
Lectures]  
Kharitonov theorem, Robust Control problem formulations and design. [5 Lectures]  
 
Applications: Robust Active damping, Robust control of Robot Manipulator, Aircraft Hovering. [5 Lectures]  
 
Textbooks  
1. K. Zhou, J. C. Doyle and K. Glover, (1995), Robust and Optimal Control, Prentice-Hall, Englewood 
Cliffs 
2. Feng Lin,  (2007), Robust Control Design: An Optimal Control Approach,  Wiley    
3. S. P. Bhattacharyya, H. Chapellat, and L.H. Keel, (1995), Robust Control: The Parametric Approach. 
Prentice-Hall 
 
Relevant materials 
Robust Control Toolbox help file (in MATLAB).  
 
 
  
52 
 
Title Foundations of Cyber-Physical Systems Number EEL4XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0[3] 
Offered for B.Tech.  Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Familiarize students with the concepts of Cyber-physical Systems (CPS).  
2. Deliver the knowledge of CPS by focusing design and implementation.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. This course provides the knowledge of principles of operation and performance of CPS.  
2. The student must be able to design and develop CPS for various industry applications.  
 
Contents:  
Introduction to Cyber-physical Systems [5 Lectures]: Basic principles of CPS; Industry 4.0, AutoSAR,  IIOT 
implications; Building Automation, Medical CPS 
 
CPS - Platform Components [5 Lectures]: CPS HW platforms - Processors, Sensors, Actuators; CPS Network - 
WirelessHart, CAN, Automotive Ethernet; Scheduling Real Time CPS ta sks 
 
Modelling and Control of CPS [10 Lectures]:  
Synchronous and Asynchronous Model;  Principles of Dynamical Systems (5L)  
Hybrid Systems; Control and Sensing Techniques (5L) 
 
CPS - Computational Issues [10 Lectures]:  
Effect of scheduling, bus latency (5L) 
Sense and actuation faults on control performance, network congestion. (5L)  
 
Applications of CPS [4 Lectures]: Robot motion control; Autonomous Vehicle control; Smart Grid; Building 
Automation 
 
Secure Deployment of CPS [8 Lectures]:  
Threat model; Denial-of-Service (DoS) attacks and deception attacks (3L) 
Attack detection, location and validation; Secure state estimator (5L) 
 
Textbooks  
1. Rajeev Alur, Principles of Cyber-Physical Systems, MIT Press, 2015.  
2. Edward A. Lee and Sanjit A. Seshia, Introduction to Embedded Systems, A Cyber-Physical Systems 
Approach Second Edition, MIT Press, ISBN 978-0-262-53381-2, 2017. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
53 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Devices and Circuits 
 
  
54 
 
Title VLSI Design Number EEL3XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech.  Type Elective Course 
Prerequisite Circuits, Basic understanding of electronics   
Objectives  
The Instructor will : 
1. Give overview of IC Technology and unit process 
2. Teach students the basics of digital circuit design methods.  
3. Provide the understanding of necessary concepts for digital VLSI design according to design rules decided 
by various technologies 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Understand designing and optimizing digital circuits with different quality metrics: cost,  speed, power 
dissipation, and reliability  
2.  Design the building blocks of digital systems  
 
Contents   
Introduction to VLSI Design, CMOS process sequence, fabrication and layout design rules [3 lectures] 
Technology Scaling, Effect of Process variations [2 lectures] 
Interconnect and wire models [2 lectures] 
CMOS Inverter, Static and Dynamic Behaviour, Propagation delay, noise margins, and power dissipation [4 
lectures] 
Static timing analysis, delay estimation using logical effort and Elmore delay [4 lectures]  
Designing combinational logic gates: Static CMOS design, Ratioed Logic, Pseudo NMOS, Pass Transistors 
Logic, design examples like multiplexers, decoders [4 lectures] 
Dynamic CMOS design, speed and power dissipation, choosing a logic style, design examples like clock 
generation circuits [3 lectures] 
Static Latches and Registers, Dynamic Latches and Registers, Alternative Register styles, pipelinin g, 
choosing a clock strategy [5 lectures] 
Timing Issues in Digital Circuits:  Timing classification, Synchronous Design, Synchronous timing basics, 
Skew and Jitter, clock distribution techniques [5 lectures] 
Memory Classification, Building Blocks, Memory core, Read only Memory, Read -write Memories, Memory 
peripheral circuitry [5 lectures] 
Decoders, Sense Amplifiers, Buffers, reliability, power dissipation, future trends validation and test [5 
lectures] 
 
Textbook  
1. Rabaey, J. M.,  Chandrakasan, A.,  Nikolic, B., (2011),  Digital integrated Circuits, A design perspective, 2nd 
Edition, PHI Learning 
2. Weste N. H. E., Harris D. M. (2009), CMOS VLSI Design, 4th Edition, Pearson 
3. Plummer J. D., Deal D. M., Griffin P. B., (2009) Silicon VLSI Technology - Fundamentals, Practice And 
Modelling, Pearson 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Chandorkar,A.N., VLSI Design, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian 
Institute of Technology Bombay, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117/101/117101058/ 
2. Chandrakasan,A., MIT OpenCourseware, Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-374-analysis-and-design- 
of-digital-integrated-circuits-fall-2003/ 
 
 
 
 
 
55 
 
Title Biosensors Number EE3XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [E] 3–0–2 [4] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Fundamentals of Electrical and  Bio Engineering   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Make the students understand the fundamentals of working principles of biosensors  
2. Describe the bio-specific interaction used for various applications 
3. Evaluate and compare techniques used in today’s time like electric, optical and mechanical 
4. Show and explain the examples of practical and real world biosensors  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Identify the working mechanism of biosensors 
2. Understand the detailed characterization of biosensors in terms of specificity and selectivity  
3. Comprehend the functioning of commercial biosensors 
4. Create mechanisms for developing biosensors on their own by collaborating or working in an 
interdisciplinary group 
 
Contents   
Introduction to basics of sensors and biospecific interactions [8 Lectures]: 
Introduction to sensors and actuators, different components of biosensors, functionalization layers and their 
importance (4L) 
Biomolecules for biosensors, catalytic biosensors, affinity biosensors, biomolecular interaction (4L) 
Electrical and optical techniques for biosensing [8 Lectures]: 
Electrical - CV, ISFET (4L) 
Optical - Fluorescence, ELISA, SERS, SPR  (4L) 
Electrochemical, mechanical and advanced techniques for biosensing [11 Lectures]:  
Electrochemical (sub classifications like impedemetric, voltammetric, amperometric) (6L)  
Mechanical (Bio-MEMS), color based, microfluidics (including packaging), AI based biosensors(5L)  
Sensor key parameters and examples of commercially available biosensors [7 Lectures]: 
Sensitivity, selectivity, response- and recovery time, LOD etc. (4L) 
Industry standards and COTS bio-sensors and their functioning, need and relevance of biosensors in Indian 
context (3L) 
Readout Electronics[8 Lectures]: 
Basic circuitry to make readout electronics, Potentiostats, amperometric circuits, charge to voltage converter 
(4L) 
Variable gain amplifier, low noise amplifier, high resolution and low noise data converters, mismatch 
insensitive data converters (4L) 
 
Lab work: 
Biosensor material selection and characterization; Biochemical reagents and assays; Surface 
functionalization (Covalent/non -covalent) for Biosensing; Biosensor fabrication; Biosensor operation and 
signal generation; Biosensor sensitivity assay; Biose nsor reproducibility; Biosensor Selectivity; 
Determination of limit of detection; Use of appropriate controls; Biosensor application on real samples.  
 
Textbook  
1. Yoon J.-Y., (2016),  Introduction to Biosensors, Springer 
2. Banica F.-G., (2012), Chemical Sensors and Biosensors: Fundamentals and Applications, Wiley 
3. Rasooly A., Herold K. E., (2008), Biosensors and Biodetection, Humana Press, Science 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Materials for Biomedical Applications, MIT Open Courseware, 
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/materials-science-and-engineering/3-051j-materials-for-biomedical-
applications-spring-2006/lecture-notes/ 
 
56 
 
Title Biosensors Number EE3XX0 
Course Title CAD for VLSI Number EEL7XX0 
 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–2 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Elective 
Pre-requisite VLSI Design   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Enable students to learn the concepts of computer aided design aspects of design of integrated circuits.  
2. Provide exposure to the students about automating design cycle for VLSI Design.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
Students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply principles of CAD for VLSI for digital designs. 
2. Implement the optimization algorithms for automated design of Analo g circuits. 
 
Contents 
Introduction [2 Lectures]: Introduction to VLSI design methodologies and supporting CAD tool environment  
VLSI Design Automation [5 Lectures]:  Overview of System C; Schematic editors; Layout editors; Module 
generators; Placement and routing tools; Behavioral, functional, logic and circuit simulators  
Algorithmic Techniques for Floor -planning [5 Lectures]: Algorithmic Techniques in VLSI CAD, Introduction of 
Floor planning, simulated annealing and mixed integer programming formulation  
Placement and Partitioning [4 Lectures]: Classical placement algorithms, Simultaneous level partitioning based 
PDP (Power Delay Product) 
Routing [3 Lectures]: General and Channel Routing, Global Routing, High-level power/current estimation. 
Optimization based Analog Design [4 Lectures]:  Analog Circuit Design Challenges, Performance metrics and 
trade-offs, Deterministic and metaheuristic optimization based automated design flows at transistor level.  
Verilog-A [5 Lectures]: Introduction to Verilog-A, Basic functions and statements, User defined functions and 
systems tasks, Basic analog designs using Verilog-A. 
 
Lab Experiments on algorithmic level design implementation, basic floorplanning and routing, High -level 
power estimation algorithms, Automation of Analog Circuit Design, Complex analog circuit design using 
optimization techniques, Verilog-A programming. 
 
Text Books 
1. Gerez,S.H., Algorithms for VLSI Design Automation. Wiley, 1998. 
2. Sait,S.M., and Youssef,H., VLSI Physical Design Automation. World Scientific Publishing Company, 1999. 
3. Fakhfakh,M., Esteban,T. -C., Siarry,P., Computational Intelligence in Analog and Mixed -Signal (AMS) and 
Radio-Frequency (RF) Circuit Design. Springer 2015. 
4. Kundert,K.S., Zinke,O., The Designer’s Guide to Verilog-AMS. Springer, June 2004. 
 
Preparatory course material 
1. Kamakoti,V., and Balachandran,S., CAD for VLSI, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Computer 
Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras,      
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106106088/ 
2. Barros,M.F.M., Guilherme,J.M.C., Horta,N.C.G., Analog Circuits an d Systems Optimization based on 
Evolutionary Computation Techniques. Springer, 2010. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
57 
 
Title Sensors and Actuators Number EE4XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [E] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. 4th Year Type Elective Course 
Prerequisite Material Science and Engg., Semiconductor Devices, 
Analog circuits 
  
Objectives  
The Instructor will : 
1. Make the students know about different types of sensors and materials for sensors  
2. Use concepts for converting physical parameter into an electrical quantity 
3. Explain sensor parameters, different packaging types and readout circuitry  
4. Show and explain examples of sensors relevant to the industry 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
5. Identify the commercial and most used sensors in the industry 
6. Understand the underlying sensing phenomena used in sensors 
7. Develop a synthesis process and characterize a sensor on their own 
8. Test and examine the sensor functioning and comprehend as to what needs to be developed  
 
Contents   
Introduction to Sensors and Actuators [10 Lectures]:  
Different types of sensors, classification of transducers (6L) 
Structure of a transducer and types of transducers (Fluidic actuators, Piezoelectric and piezoresistive 
actuators etc.) (4L) 
Materials for sensors [6 Lectures]: Introduction to nanostructured materials, metal oxides, quantum dots, 2D 
materials 
Parameters and characteristics of Sensors and Transducers [6 Lectures]:  Sensor parameters like sensitivity, 
selectivity, response- and recovery time, stability, ageing, repeatability, drift, calibration 
MEMS and transducers [6 Lectures]: MEMS structural elements, scaling advantages, transduction pathways, 
examples of electromechanical transduction 
Different packaging for Sensors [4 Lectures]:  Premould packaging, Moulded interconnect devices, Hermetic 
packaging, Wafer level packaging  
Sensors readouts [5 Lectures]:  Basic circuitry to read the data from sensors, Basic circuitry to read the data 
from sensors (noise, instrumentation amplifiers etc.) 
Current trends in Sensing applications [5 Lectures]:  Few examples of current sensors used in the industry and 
commercial sensors will be discussed 
                                   
Textbook  
1. Silva C. W. de, (2016), Sensors and Actuators, CRC Press 
2. Zhang S., Li L., Kumar A., (2009), Materials Characterization Technique, CRC Press 
3. Eggins B. R., (2007), Chemical Sensors and Biosensors, Wiley 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Research articles such as ACS Nano Letters, IEEE Sensors, ACS Sensors, ACS Nano, Sensors & actuators B 
etc.  
  
58 
 
Title Physics and Modeling of MOS Transistor  Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Physical Electronics   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide in-depth understanding of the modeling of semiconductor devices  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the operation and modeling of MOS transistor 
2. Develop models for novel semiconductor devices. 
 
Contents  
Fundamentals [8 Lectures]: 
Intrinsic and extrinsic semiconductors, fermi and quasi fermi-level, charge-density, electric field and potential 
(4 Lectures), Gauss’s law and Poisson’s equation, mobility and scattering mechanism, drift and diffusion (4 
Lectures)  
Two Terminal MOS Cap [10 Lectures]: 
 Flatband voltage, potential and charge balance, accumulation/depletion/inversion (5 Lectures)  
 Weak/moderate/strong inversion, high and low frequency capacitance (5 Lectures)  
MOS Transistors [15 Lectures]:  
Three terminal MOS transistor, body effect (5 Lectures) 
 Four terminal MOS transistor, effect of drain voltage, transport: mobility, series resistance, impact of doping, 
capacitance behavior (5 Lectures) 
Scaling, leakage current, impact ionization, short channel effects and optimization str ategies (5 Lectures) 
Noise and Equivalent Circuit [6 Lectures]:  
Flicker, thermal and shot noise. Small signal equivalent circuit (3 Lectures)  
Non-linearity and harmonic distortion, Non-quasi static effect (3 Lectures) 
Nanoelectronics: Challenges and future prospective (3 Lectures) 
 
Textbooks  
1. Y. Tsividis. Operation and Modeling of the MOS Transistor. Oxford University Press; 3rd edition, 2010. 
2. C. Hu, Modern Semiconductor Devices for Integrated Circuits. Pearson, 2009.  
3. D. Neamen, Semiconductor Physics And Devices. McGraw Hill Education; 4th edition, 2017. 
 
Self Learning Material  
Prof. Karmalkar, Semiconductor Device Modeling , NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electronics & 
Communications Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117/106/117106033/ 
 
Preparatory Course Material  
Prof. Karmalkar course, Solid State Devices , NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electronics & 
Communications Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117/106/117106091/ 
  
59 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Computing Systems 
  
60 
 
Title Real Time Systems Number EEXX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0[3] 
Offered for B.Tech.  Type Elective  
Prerequisite Computer Architecture, Embedded System   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Describe real-time systems and how real-time resource management algorithms and mechanisms to meet 
application timing constraints. 
2. Explain how to conduct real-time schedulability analysis. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Use RTOS for different applications 
2. Design system to meet different real time constraints in uniprocessor and multiprocessor Environment.  
 
Contents:  
Introduction of real time systems [4 Lectures]: Types of time constraints; definition of scheduling, examples of 
real time systems  
Periodic Task Scheduling [6 Lectures]:  
Timeline scheduling;Rate Monotonic scheduling; Earliest Deadline First (4L)  
Deadline Monotonic EDF with constrained deadlines (2L) 
Aperiodic task scheduling [4 Lectures]:  
Jackson’s algorithm; Horn’s algorithm; Non-preemptive scheduling (2L) 
Scheduling with precedence constraints (2L) 
Fixed-priority servers [7 Lectures]:  
Background scheduling; Polling Server Deferrable Server; Priority Exchange Sporadic Server (4L)  
Slack stealing Non-existence of optimal servers; Performance evaluation (3L)  
Dynamic priority servers [6 Lectures]:  
Dynamic Priority Exchange Server; Dynamic Sporadic Server; Total Bandwidth Server; Earliest Deadline Lat e 
Server; Improved Priority Exchange Server (4L) 
Improving TBS; Performance evaluation; The Constant Bandwidth Server (2L)  
Limited pre-emptive scheduling [6 Lectures]:  
Non-preemptive scheduling; Preemption thresholds (4L) 
Deferred Preemptions; Task splitting (2L) 
Real-time operating systems and Standards Standards for real-time operating systems; Commercial real-time 
systems; [6 Lectures]  
Linux related real-time kernels; Open-source real-time research kernels [3 Lectures] 
 
Textbooks  
1. G. C. Buttazzo (2011), 2/e, Hard Real Time Computing Systems; Springer.    
2. Phillip A. Laplante (2004), 3/e, Real Time Systems Analysis and Design, IEEE Press.  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
61 
 
Course Title Reconfigurable Computing Number EEL4XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite Digital Design   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Enable students to learn the concepts of reconfigurable computing.  
2. Provide exposure to the students about reconfigurable architectures and their programming for system level 
designs. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
Students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply principles of reconfigurable computing for digital system design.  
2. Implement the basic computing architectures using reconfigurable computing platforms.  
 
Contents: 
Reconfigurable Computing: Introduction to Reconfigurable Computing, Need of Reconfigurable Computing, 
Historical perspective in terms of system design. (3 Lectures) 
Reconfigurable Architectures: Introduction to Field Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) Technology, FPGA 
Arithmetic, Applications. (4 Lectures) 
The Systolic Model, Runtime Reconfigurable Architectures: PipeRench. (3 Lectures)  
Runtime Reconfigurable Architectures: Multi-Context, Function-Unit Architectures. (4 Lectures) 
Reconfigurable Programming: Logic Emulation Architectures, Programming Reconfigurable Computers, Logic 
Cell and Datapath Mapping. (4 Lectures) 
Behavioral Synthesis, Hardware/Software Co-design, Systolic Loop Transformations. (5 Lectures) 
Software Pipelining, Retiming, Module Generators. (5 Lectures) 
Reconfigurable Designs: Placement, Routing, Dynamically Reconfigurable Adaptive Viterbi Decoder.  (4 
Lectures)  
Network Virtualization using Reconfigurable Hardware, Security for Reconfigurable Hardware in the Cloud, 
Partitioning. (5 Lectures)  
High Level Compilation, Power Reduction Techniques, Soft GPGPUs on an FPGA, Hybrid FPGA Networks -
on-Chip. (5 Lectures) 
Text Books 
1. Bobada,C, Introduction to Reconfigurable Computing. 1st edition, Springer, 2007. 
2. Cardoso,J. and Hubner,M., Reconfigurable Computing. Springer-Verlag, 2011. 
 
Preparatory course material 
1. Tessier,R., Pocek,K. and DeHon,A., "Reconfigurable Computing Architectures,"  Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 
103, no. 3, pp. 332-354, March 2015. 
2. Todman,T.,J. et al., "Reconfigurable computing: architectures and design methods,", IEE Proceedings - 
Computers and Digital Techniques, vol. 152, no. 2, pp. 193-207, March 2005. 
  
62 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Power Engineering 
  
63 
 
Title Power System Analysis and Stability Number EE4XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Electrical Machines, Power Engineering   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide the capability to understand and analyze various phenomena associated with power systems both 
under steady state and transients 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Model the power system and determine various parameters, system status during normal and abnormal 
conditions 
 
Contents  
Load flow studies [10 Lectures]: Load flow problem: Ybus formulation (1L), Gauss-Seidel (5L), Newton- Raphson 
methods (3L), and decoupled power flow (1L) 
Short circuit studies [12 Lectures]: Zbus formulation (2L), symmetrical and unsymmetrical faults, symmetrical 
components and sequence networks (5L), analysis of symmetrical and unsymmetrical faults (5L)  
Power system stability [6 Lectures]: Definitions of stability problems, types of stability issues, swing equation, and 
swing curve, transient and small signal stability analysis of a single machine infinite bus system (5L), solution 
for swing equation (1L) 
Power system monitoring and protection [8 Lectures]: Current and potential transformers, introduction to SCADA, 
synchro-phasors (PMU) (3L), introduction to protective relaying, types of relays and introduction to circuit 
breakers (5L) 
Power system transients [6 Lectures]: Traveling waves and propagation of surges, overvoltage, lightning (5L), 
neutral grounding (1L) 
 
Textbook  
1. Stevenson,W.D.Jr., (1982), Elements of Power System Analysis, 4th Edition, McGraw Hill International 
2. Wadhwa,C.L., (2010), Electrical Power Systems, 6th Edition, New Age International Publishers 
3. Kothari,D.P., Nagrath,I.J., (2008), Power System Engineering , 2 nd Edition, McGraw Hill Education (India) 
Private Limited 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Sinha, A.K.,  Power System Analysis,  NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical Engineering, IIT 
Kharagpur, 
       https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/105/108105067/ 
1. Das, D., Power System Analysis,  NPTEL Course Material, Depart ment of Electrical Engineering,  IIT 
Kharagpur 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117105140/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
64 
 
Title Power System Operation and Control Number EE4XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Electrical Machines, Power Engineering, 
Power System Analysis and Stability 
  
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide fundamentals of operation and control strategies needed for economic, efficient and reliable operation 
of power system 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Understand and develop methods to optimize generation scheduling and maintain security of a power system 
 
Contents  
Characteristics of power generation units [5 Lectures]:  Operational and economical aspects of thermal units, 
combined cycle units, nuclear units and hydro units  
Economic dispatch [3 Lectures]:  Definition of economic dispatch proble m and various methods of economic 
dispatch  
Transmission losses [3 Lectures]: Incremental losses and penalty factors, B matrix loss formula 
Unit commitment [5 Lectures]:  Introduction to unit commitment, constraints in unit commitment, unit 
commitment methods with and without constraints  
Hydrothermal coordination [5 Lectures]:  Hydroelectric plant models, hydrothermal coordination, methods of 
hydro-scheduling  
Active power generation control [5 Lectures]:Modeling of generator, governor, prime mover and tie-line, automatic 
generation control in single area and multiarea power system  
Power system security [5 Lectures]:  Factors affecting power system security, contingency analysis, sensitivity 
factors  
State estimat ion in power system [5 Lectures]:  State estimation methods - weighted least squares, orthogonal 
decomposition, applications of state estimation  
Optimal power flow [6 Lectures]: Solution of optimal power flow, sensitivity analysis (3L), security constrained  
optimal power flow (3L) 
 
Textbook  
1. Wood,A.J., Wollenberg,B.F., (2011), Power Generation, Operation and Control, Wiley-India edition 
2. Wadhwa,C.L., (2010), Electrical Power Systems, 6th Edition, New Age International Publishers. 
3. Kothari,D.P., Nagrath,I.J., ( 2009), Modern Power System Analysis , 3rd Edition, Tata McGraw Hill Education 
Private Limited 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Das,D.,  Power System Engineering, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian 
Institute of Technology Kharagpur,https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108105104/    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
65 
 
Title Power Electronics Number EE4XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Physical Electronics   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide fundamentals of power electronic circuits and applications  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Design and analyze various types of converter circuits for applications in AC as well as DC circuits  
 
Contents  
Review of power electronic switches: Review of diode, BJT, MOSFET, IGBT as switching devices (2 lectures)  
Controlled rectifiers: SCR switching circuits, protection, series and parallel operation (2 lectures), single phase 
controlled rectifiers with R, R -L, R-L-E load, effect of source inductance (3 lectures), three phase rectifiers (3 
lectures), dual converters, power factor, and harmonics in single phase and three phase rectifiers (2 lectures) 
AC voltage controller: Principle of ON-OFF and phase control (2 lecture), single phase and three phase controllers 
(3 lectures), cycloconverter (2 lectures) 
DC-DC converters: Step-up and step-down converters with various type of loads (2 lectures), buck, boost, buck-
boost and cuk regulators, isolated DC-DC converters (5 lectures) 
Power Supplies:  Introduction to switched -mode, resonant and bidirectional AC and DC power supplies (4 
lectures) 
Inverters: Principle of operation, single -phase and three -phase bridge inverter, 120 ° and 180 ° conduction (5 
lectures), PWM inverters, current source inverters, space-vector-modulation (5 lectures) 
Other converter topologies : PWM rectifiers, dual active bridge topol ogy, introduction to multilevel inverters (2 
lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Rashid,M.H., (2004), Power Electronics Circuits, Devices, and Applications, 3rd Edition, Pearson Education Inc. 
2. Hart,D.W., (2011), Power Electronics, Tata McGraw-Hill Education Private Limited. 
3. Mohan,N., (2007), First Course on Power Electronics and Drives, MNPERE. 
 
Self Learning Material 
Bhuvaneswari,G.,  Power Electronics,  NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian 
Institute of Technology Delhi, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/102/108102145/  
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
66 
 
Title Industrial Drives Number EE4XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Electrical Machines, Power Electronics   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide an understanding of the various AC and DC drives along with the various converter topologies used 
and their control used in industry 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Design and develop various power electronic drives along with their control  
 
Contents  
Fundamentals of electric drives:  Factors affecting selection of drives, speed -torque characteristics of motors and 
loads, characteristics and operating modes of drive motors (3 lec tures), starting, braking and speed control of 
motors, 4 quadrant drives (3 lectures) 
DC motor drives:  Characteristics, starting methods, braking methods, speed control using converters and 
choppers (5 lectures), full converter, semi converter and dual converter fed DC drives (3 lectures) 
Three phase induction motor drives:  Starting methods, braking methods, speed control of cage rotor induction 
machines using AC voltage controllers, voltage-source and current-source inverters (5 lectures), V-by-f control 
and other control techniques, speed control of wound -rotor induction machines, slip-power recovery scheme 
(5 lectures), field oriented control and direct torque control of AC motors (2 lectures)  
Three phase synchronous motor drives: Starting methods, braking methods (5 lectures), speed control methods (3 
lectures) 
Special machines and their drives:  Permanent magnet brush -less motor drives, permanent magnet synchronous 
motor drives (3 lectures), stepper, reluctance motor drives and AC and DC traction drives ( 5 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Dubey,G.K., (2001), Fundamentals of Electrical Drives, 2nd Edition, Alpha Science International Ltd 
2.  De,N.K., Sen,P.K., (1999), Electrical Drives, Prentice Hall of India Pvt Ltd 
3.  Vas,P., (1998), Sensorless Vector and Direct Torque Control, Oxford University Press 
 
Self Learning Material 
Das,S.P., Fundamentals of Electric Drives, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian 
Institute of Technology Kanpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/104/108104140/   
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
67 
 
Title Measurement and Instrumentation Number EEL3XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Introduction to Electrical Engineering   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide an  understanding of the constructional details and principle of operation of basic measuring 
instruments 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Understand the operation of various measuring devices and choose the appropriate mea suring device for 
measurement of different parameters 
 
Contents  
Measurement of Electrical Quantities: Voltmeter, ammeter, and ohmmeter, moving  coil instruments (3 lectures), 
moving iron instruments, AC and DC measurements (4 lectures) 
Power and Energy Measurement: DC and AC power measurement, low power factor  wattmeter, power 
measurement in three -phase circuits (3 lectures), reactive  power measurement, energy meters, theory and 
operation, compensation, power factor meter (4 lectures) 
Instrument Transformers: Current and potential transformers (5 lectures) 
Measurement of Electrical Elements: Measurement of medium, low and high resistances (3 lectures), AC bridges, 
inductance and capacitance measurement (4lectures) 
Electronic Measurements:  Electronic instruments for current, voltage and power  measurement (5 lectures), 
Cathode ray oscilloscope, frequency and phase angle measurements using CRO spectrum (3 lectures) 
Instrumentation: Transducers, classification & selection of transducers, strain  gauges, inductive & capacitive 
transducers (4 lectures), piezoelectric and Hall -effect transducers, thermistor, thermocouple, encoder (4 
lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Shawney,A.K., (2007), A Course in Electrical and Electronic Measurements and Instrumentation , 18 th edition, 
Dhanpat Rai & Co. (P) Ltd. 
2. Helfrick,A.D., Cooper,W.D., (2015), Modern Electronic Instrumentation & Measurement Techniques , Pearson 
Education India 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
68 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specializations 
  
69 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Communication Engineering Specialization 
  
70 
 
Title Wireless Communications Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.-Ph.D. Dual Degree (Comm. Engg.) Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Fundamentals of Communications   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide students an understanding of the concepts related to communication over wireless fading channel. 
2.  Expose students to concepts and techniques for exploiting fading and application of these concepts in 
multiuser communication systems context. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand concepts related to deep fade, diversity techniques and channel capacity for point -to-point 
wireless communications systems. 
2. Analyze multi -user networks and understanding of techniques like opportunistic communication, 
multiuser diversity, superposition coding and successive interference cancellation.  
3. Analyze and design wireless ad-hoc networks with special emphasis on energy constrained networks  
 
Contents  
Wireless Channels [10 Lectures]:  
Review of signal detection over AWGN channels and M-ary Modulation (5L) 
Modelling of wireless channels; space, time and frequency channel coherence; input/output channel models 
for single and multi-antenna systems (5L) 
Diversity Techniques [12 Lectures]:  
Digital modulation and its performance in fading (4L) 
Deep fade and diversity (3L) 
Realizing diversity: time diversity, frequency diversity, antenna diversity (5L)  
Wireless Channel Capacity [10 Lectures]:  
Capacity of the Gaussian channels (2L) 
Outage limited and ergodic capacity of fading channels (4L) 
Waterfillingalgorithm and opportunistic communication (4L)  
Multiuser system design [10 Lectures]:  
Multiple access and random access techniques (5L) 
Multiuser channel capacity and multiuser diversity (5L) 
 
Textbook  
1. Tse, D. and Viswanath, P., (2005), Fundamentals of wireless communication, Cambridge University Press.  
2.  Goldsmith, A., (2005), Wireless Communications, Cambridge University Press.  
3.  Simon, M. K. and Alouini, M. S., (2004), Digital communication over fading channels, John Wiley and Sons. 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Zheng, L., Principles of Wireless Communications, MIT OpenCourseWare, Electrical Engineering & 
Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, https://ocw.mit.edu /courses/electrical-
engineering-and-computer-science/6-452-principles-of-wireless-communications-spring-2006/index.htm 
Preparatory Course Material  
Jagannatham, A. K., Principles of Communication II, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical 
Engineering,       Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108104098/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
71 
 
Title Digital Communications: Hands-on  Number EEP7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P[C] 1–0–2 [2] 
Offered for B. Tech., M. Tech. Type Core 
Prerequisite Communication Systems   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
Provide students with hands -on exposure towards the design and implementation of digital communication 
systems using software defined radio technology.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Design communications systems by assessing the design trade -offs and real -world communication 
requirements 
2.  Utilize fundamental communication techniques such as CDMA and multicarrier modulation like OFDM for 
the current and future wireless networks relevant to industry needs.   
 
Contents  
Lecture: 
Introduction to programmable hardware, Software Architecture, USRP hardware, signal processing chain, channel 
modeling, estimation and equalization, fading and diversity, carrier and symbol synchronization, multicarrier 
modulation, CDMA 
 
Laboratory: 
Lab 1: Setting up the programmable hardware to transmit and receive signals  
Lab 2: Estimating signal power, noise power, the power spectrum, and the bandwidth of  
Signals 
Lab 3: Sampling, aliasing, interpolation, resampling, upsampling, and down sampling 
Lab 4: Dealing with narrowband channel impairments: synchronization and channel  
estimation 
Lab 5: Implementation of a transmitter and receiver using programmable hardware  
Lab 6-7: Receiver Structure & Waveform Synthesis of a Transmitter and a Receiver 
Lab 8 -9: Implementation of multicarrier modulation like OFDM and synchronization using programmable 
hardware 
Lab 10: Implementation of Spectrum Sensing Techniques 
Lab 11-14: Term project 
 
Textbook  
Pu, D. and Wyglinski, A. M. (2013), Digital Communication System Engineering with Software -Defined Radio, 1st 
Edition, Artech House 
 
Self Learning Material  
Wyglinski, A. M.,  Software Defined Radio Systems and Analysis, Online Course Material, Department of Electrical 
and Computer Engineering, Worcester Polytechnic Institute, 
https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLBfTSoOqoRnOTBTLahXBlxaDUNWdZ3FdS  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
72 
 
Title UAV Assisted Wireless Networks  Number EEL7XX 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech., M. Tech and Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Wireless Communications   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide a comprehensive overview of wireless communication and networking with UAVs.   
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Perform channel modeling for UAV -BSs and UAV -UEs, design and optimization of their deployment, 
trajectory, multiple access, and resource management. 
 
Contents  
UAV Applications and Use Cases [5 lectures]: IoT systems, Wireless backhauling for ground systems, three -
dimensional MIMO 
Basic Theoretical Background [10 Lectures]:  
Aerial channel modelling and waveform design (5L) 
Network architectures, disruption-tolerant airborne network protocols (5L) 
UAV Assisted Cellular Communications [18 Lectures]:  
Deployment of UAV base stations for optimized coverage (5L) 
UAV network modelling (5L) 
Downlink performance analysis for UAV base station (5L) 
Resource management(3L) 
Cellular Assisted UAV Sensing [9 Lectures]: 
Cooperative communication in UAV networks (5L) 
Security of UAV UEs (4L) 
 
Textbook  
1. Namuduri, K., Chaumette, S., Kim, J., and Sterbenz, J., (2017), UAV Networks and Communications, 
Cambridge University Press 
2. Saad, W., Bennis, M., Mozaffari, M., and Lin, X., (2020), Wireless Communications and Networking for 
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles, Cambridge University Press 
 
Self Learning Material  
Best Readings in UAV Assisted Wireless Networks, IEEE 
 https://www.comsoc.org/publications/best-readings/uav-assisted-wireless-networks 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Jagannatham, A. K., Principles of Communication II, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108104098/ 
 
 
 
  
73 
 
Title Optical Signal Processing Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech., M. Tech., Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Semiconductor Physics, Electromagnetism and 
Optics 
  
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce the basics of nonlinearities in optical devices and how they can be harnessed for processing of 
light waves. 
2. Explain the working, modeling and characterization of various optical signal processing devices along with 
their advantages and limitations. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Design, characterize and analyze basic optical signal processing circuits.  
2. Appreciate the advantages of optical signal processing over conventional electronic signal processing 
techniques. 
 
Contents  
Nonlinear Optics for Signal Processing [8 Lectures]:  
Nonlinear optical susceptibility, time-domain description of optical nonlinearities (4L),  
Kramers-Kronig relations, intensity dependent refractive index of materials (4L)  
Third Order Nonlinearities [18 Lectures]:  
Theory and modeling of Optical Kerr Effect (2L),  
Self Phase Modulation and Cross Phase Modulation processes (4L),  
Optical phase conjugation, Four Wave Mixing and Third Harmonic Generation (5L),  
Photon-phonon interaction, Stimulated Brillouin, Raman and Rayleigh scattering (5L),  
Two Photon Absorption (2L)  
Optical Signal Processing Devices [16 Lectures]:  
Optical Fourier Transform (2L),  
Optical correlators (2L), 
Pulse compression, pulse shaping (4L), 
Optical interconnects (2L),  
Multiplexers, mixers, wavelength conversion (4L), 
Tunable optical delay (2L)  
 
Textbooks  
1. Boyd, R. W., (2013), Nonlinear optics. Elsevier. 
2. Dragoman D., and Dragoman M. (2013), Advanced optoelectronic devices. Vol. 1. Springer Science and Business 
Media.. 
3. Saleh, B.E.A, and Teich M.C., (1991), Fundamentals of photonics. Vol. 22. New York: Wiley. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
Singh B.P and Rustagi K.C., Nonlinear Optics, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Physics, Indian Institute 
of Technology Bombay,  
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/115/101/115101008/ 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Roy S., Introduction toNonlinear Optics and its Applications, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Physics, 
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur,  
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/115/105/115105105/ 
 
 
  
74 
 
Title Optical Networks Number EE7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech., M.Tech,Ph.D Type Elective 
Prerequisite Basics of Fiber Optic communications   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce elements and components of an optical networking solution.  
2. Explore the capabilities and limitations of different network topologies.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Identify the required network technology for a given requirement. 
2. Solve WDM network design problems. 
 
Contents  
Introduction to Optical Networks: Types of traffic, Services, Optical packet and circuit switching, Optical Layered 
Architecture. Optical Network elements [5 lectures] 
Local Area Network:  Network topologies, Multiplexing and Multiple access techniques [4 lectures], Network 
resource sharing, Network capacity, Protocols. [4 lectures] 
Optical Access Networks: Passive Network Topology, PON architecture [3 lectures], Multi point control protocol, 
Dynamic bandwidth allocation, FTTx networks [5 lectures] 
Metropolitan and Wide Area Networks:  SONET/SDH, Optical Transport Network [3 lectures], Wavelength 
Routing Network, Routing and Assignment Algorithm. [5 lectures] 
Network Control, Management and Survivability: Network management system architecture, Functionality, 
GMPLS [3 lectures], Impairment, Survivability, Protection and Restoration. [5 lectures] 
Free-Space Optical Networks: Classification, FSO network topologies, Design factors, FSO Network 
applications. [5 Lectures] 
 
Textbooks 
1. Chadha D. (2019), Optical WDM networks: from static to elastic networks, Wiley-IEEE Press. 
2. Grobe K. and Eiselt M. (2013), Wavelength Division Multiplexing, A Practical Engineering Guide, Wiley. 
3. Ramaswami R., Sivarajan K.N. and Sasaki G.H. (2010), Optical Networks: A Practical Perspective , 3rd Edition, 
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers. 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Keiser G. (2013), Fibre Optic Communication, McGraw-Hill, 5th Edition. 
 
 
  
75 
 
Title Optical Techniques for Communications Number EE-4XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–2 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Basic EM Theory   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Introduce light propagation methods and techniques such as OAM Multiplexing, spatial filtering and 
Holography useful for future communication systems. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Work with optical components and design basic optical setups such as a free-space optical link, interferometer, 
beam analysis, imaging and Holography. 
Course Content 
Propagation Techniques: Ray propagation through optical components (mirrors, lenses, beam splitters) [4 
lectures], Propagation characteristics of Gaussian, LG and HG beams [5 lectures], OAM content, OAM 
generation, OAM Data multiplexing [3 lectures]. 
Interferometry and Holography: Coherence, Michelson and Mach-Zehnder Interferometer, Polarization concepts 
[4 lectures]. Optical Fourier Transform, Diffraction, 4-f Imaging system, Spatial filtering [4 lectures]. 
Holographic recording and reconstruction, Recording material [5 lectures], Holographic I nterferometry [3 
lectures] 
Lab Experiments will be conducted on collimation, beam expansion, beam analysis, interference 
phenomenon and applications, polarization effects, Imaging and Hologram generation.  
Textbooks  
1. Saleh, B. E. A., and Teich, M. C., (2007) Fundamentals of Photonics, John Wiley & Sons. 
2. Thomas K., (2005), Handbook of holographic interferometry- optical and digital methods, Wiley-VCH. 
3. Hariharan P., (2002) Basics of Holography, Cambridge University Press. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
Bhattacharya S., Optical Engineering, NPTEL, Department of Electrical Engineering, IIT Madras, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/106/108106161/ 
  
76 
 
Title RF system design for Communications Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. - Year Type Elective  
Prerequisite Engineering Electromagnetics, Microwave Circuits   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Familiarize behavior of cascaded blocks in RF system and effect of specification of blocks on system 
performance  
2. Provide basic understanding about behavior of intermodulation products, spurious responses  
3. Provide basic understanding of linearity of a system 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Formulate and analyse system specification to control gain requirement, noise figure of the system.  
2. Obtain basic understanding of linearity of a cascade from specifications on its modules.  
3. Obtain basic understanding of the spurious responses in a conversion scheme  
 
Contents  
Introduction to Wireless Circuit Design: Radio Channel and modulation requirements, bits, symbols and 
waveforms, wireless system building blocks, system specification and their relation to circuit design - system 
noise and noise floor, System amplitude and phase behaviour, introduction to MIC - amplifier & oscillator (5 
lectures) 
Gain:S, T and X parameter, Module Gain, Overall Response, Standard Cascade, Bilateral Modules(4 lectures)  
Interconnections:Lossy Interconnections, Nonstandard Impedances, Sensitivities(3 lectures)  
Noise Figure: Noise Factor and Noise Figure, Cascaded m odule- applicable gain & noise figure, Impedance -
Dependent Noise Factors, Image Noise -Mixers, Extreme Mismatch -Voltage Amplifiers, Gain Controls(5 
lectures) 
Nonlinearity: Representing Nonlinear Responses, 2 nd and 3rd order terms, Frequency Dependence, Casc ades-
intermodulation products (IM) Adding Coherently and randomly (4 lectures)  
Intermodulation:Anomalous IMs, Measuring IMs, Intermodulation of Noise, Composite Distortion, optimizing 
cascades(4 lectures) 
Linearity improving architecture: Parallel Combinin g- hybrid, push -pull, Combiner Trees, Feedback, 
Feedforward - Intermods and Harmonics, Nonideal Performance(5 lectures) 
Contaminating Signals: Frequency conversion basics, Spurs, Two-Signal IMs, Hard& soft Limiting(3 lectures) 
Mixer:Mixers Through the LO Port - AM Suppression, FM Transfer, Single-Sideband Transfer, Mixing Between 
LO Components(4 lectures) 
Phase noise - Jitter, Receiver Desensitization, Sources of Phase Noise, Processing Phase Noise in a Cascade, 
Determining the Effect on Data(5 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. William Egan, (2003), Practical RF System Design, by William Egan, 6 th Edition, John Wiley & Sons  
2. Ulrich L. Rohde, David P. Newkirk, (2000), RF/ Microwave Circuit design for wireless applications, John 
Wiley & Sons 
 
Self Learning Material  
Kumar P., RF Integrated Circuits, Department of EE, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117102012/# 
 
Preparatory Course Material  
Bhattacharjee R., Microwave Engineering, Department of EEE, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, 
https://swayam.gov.in/nd1_noc19_ee68/preview 
 
 
 
 
 
77 
 
Title RADAR Engineering Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. ,M.Tech. Type Elective course 
Prerequisite Basics of RF circuits, Fundamentals of 
Communication Systems  
  
Objectives  
The Instructor will : 
1. Teach the fundamentals RADAR. 
2.  Teach building blocks and different types of RADAR.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the building blocks and working principles of RADAR.  
 
Contents   
Introduction: Working principle, RADAR range equations, maximum unambiguous range, pulse repetition 
frequency, radar block diagram.     (5 lectures) 
Detection: Probability of detection, False alarm, radar cross section of targets.                                  (3 lectures) 
Types of RADAR:Pulse radars and CW radars, MTI RADAR, Doppler effect, delay-line cancellers, blind speeds.   
(5 lectures) 
Moving target and tracking: Moving target detector, limitations of MTI, tracking with radar, monopulse tracking, 
conical scan.       (5 lectures) 
RADAR measurements:  RADAR measurement and accuracy, Range and velocity ambiguities, the ambiguity 
diagram.    (4 lectures) 
Pulse shaping: Pulse compression-principles, matched filter, chirp waveforms.  (4 lectures)  
Clutter: Descriptions of land & sea clutter, detection of targets in clutter. (4 lectures)  
RADAR antenna: Requirements of RADAR antenna, antenna parameters, reflector antennas, scanning phased 
array antennas, diplexing antenna.  (5 lectures) 
RADAR receiver:  Receiver architecture, heterodyne receiver, noise figure. (4 lectures) Transmitter: Transmitter 
architecture, isolation between transmitter and receiver, duplexers. (3 lectur es)    
 
Textbook  
1. Skolnik M.I., (2017), Introduction to RADAR systems, 3rd Ed., McGraw Hill. 
2. Richards M.A., (2005), Fundamentals of RADAR signal processing, Indian Ed., McGraw Hill. 
3. Carpentier M.H., (1988), Principles of modern RADAR systems, Artech house publishers. 
 
Self Learning Material  
O'Donnell R.M. , Introduction to RADAR systems, MIT open course, MIT Lincoln Laboratory,   
https://ocw.mit.edu/resources/res-ll-001-introduction-to-radar-systems-spring-2007/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
78 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Intelligent Communication and Networking Specialization 
 
 
  
79 
 
Title Design and Analysis of Communication Networks Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–2 [4] 
Offered for B.Tech., M. Tech., Ph.D. Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Data and Computer Communications, Signals and 
Systems 
  
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide in-depth understanding of communication network analysis, modeling and simulation techniques. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Analyse and evaluate communication networks using analytical and simulation -based methods including 
traffic models, graph models and mobility models.  
2. Design and program software components for network simulations and analysis.  
 
Contents  
Probabilistic models for communication systems [10 Lectures]: 
Linear System with Random process Input (4L) 
LTI System with WSS Process Input, point-to-point communications link (2L) 
multi-point links, random and multiple access techniques (4L) 
Modelling and Analysis of Communication Networks [16 Lectures]: 
Random number generation, mobility models (3L) 
Channel models, topology models, graph theory and algorithms (5L)  
Queuing models, queuing networks (5L) 
Network calculus (3L) 
Simulation of Communication Networks [16 Lectures]:  
Discrete event-based simulation (3L) 
Monte-carlo simulation(4L) 
Rate-based simulation (3L) 
Analysis of simulation results, statistical analysis (4L)  
Visualization of results (2L) 
Lab Experiments will be conducted on traffic modeling, link-level, system-level, packet level simulation, 
SW/HW in the loop. 
Textbooks  
1. Srikant, R.  and Ying, L., (2014), Communication Networks: An Optimization, Control and Stochastic 
Networks Perspective , Cambridge University Press. 
2. Kumar, A., Manjunath, D. and Kuri, J.,  (2004), Communication Networking: An Analytical Approach, 
Morgan Kaufman Series in Networking, (an imprint of Elsevier Science)  
3. Bonald, T. and Feuillet, M., (2011), Network Performance Analysis, Wiley.  
 
Reference Book 
Law, A. M., (2015), Simulation Modeling and Analysis, Fifth Edition, McGraw-Hill. 
 
Self Learning Material 
Scalable Wireless Ad-hoc Network Simulator, http://jist.ece.cornell.edu/index.html 
   
Preparatory Material 
Modiano, E.,  Data Communication Networks,  MIT OpenCourseWare, Electrical Engineering & Computer 
Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-
computer-science/6-263j-data-communication-networks-fall-2002/index.htm 
 
 
 
 
80 
 
Title Intelligent Radio Networks Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering/ Computer Science and 
Engineering 
L-T-P [C] 3–0–2 [4] 
Offered for B.Tech., M. Tech., Ph.D. Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, Data 
and Computer Communications 
  
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide understanding of the intricacies involved in making intelligent and cognitive radios work. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Use intelligent techniques to address the challenges and trade-offs in cognitive radio networks  
 
Contents  
Introduction to Software defined radios (SDR) [6 lectures]:  
Spectrum scarcity, Spectrum white space, Fixed spectrum allocation [3L],  
Software defined radio (SDR), Limitations of SDR [3L]. 
Cognitive radios [6 lectures]:  
Introduction, Evolution, Concept, Dynamic spectrum access, Cognitive cycle [3L], 
Functions, spectrum sensing, spectrum management, spectrum mobility, Cognitive radio architecture [3L].  
Software Defined Networking [10 lectures]: 
Evolution, operation, applications [5L], 
Open flow specifications, network function virtualization [5L]. 
Cognitive Radio Networking [15 lectures]:  
MAC layer for CRN, routing models in CRN [5L], 
Cross layer considerations: impact on upper layer protocol design, trade-offs[10L]. 
Intelligent radio and Intelligent Radio Networking [10 lectures]: 
Intelligent techniques for spectrum sensing, spectrum access and spectrum sharing [5L],  
Use of AI and ML in network management, applications and services [5L].  
 
Laboratory: 
Introduction to MATLAB, GNU Radio and USRP platform, Simulate CR/IR network in MATLAB, Centralized 
cooperative spectrum sensing in CRN using ns3, Experiments with WiFi based WLAN MAC protocols  
 
Textbooks  
1. Xiao, Y., and Hu, F. (2008), Cognitive radio networks, 1st Edition, CRC press. 
2. Göransson, P., Black, C. and Culver, T. (2016), Software Defined Networks: A Comprehensive Approach, 2nd 
Edition, Morgan Kauffman. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
1. Rawat, M.,  Basics of Software Defined Radio and Practical Applications,  NPTEL Course Material, Department 
of Electronics and Communication Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/107/108107107/ 
2. K. B. Letaief, W. Chen, Y. Shi, J. Zhang and Y. A. Zhang, "The Roadmap to 6G: AI Empower ed Wireless 
Networks," IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 57, no. 8, pp. 84-90, August 2019. 
3. Relevant recent research papers in the field. 
   
Preparatory Material 
Modiano, E., Data Communication Networks, MIT OpenCourseWare, Electrical Engineering &  Computer 
Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical -engineering-and-
computer-science/6-263j-data-communication-networks-fall-2002/index.htm 
 
 
 
 
81 
 
Title Computation Oriented Communications  Number EEL7XX 
Department Electrical Engineering and Computer Science and 
Engineering 
L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech., M. Tech., Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, Data and 
Computer Communications 
  
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Introduce the area of computation oriented communications   
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Design communication networks for federated learning 
 
Contents  
Resources for Communication networks for distributed computing [6 Lectures] 
Federated Learning [6 Lectures] 
Edge Intelligence and distributed computation [6 Lectures] 
Rate-latency-reliability tradeoff[6 Lectures] 
Network Intelligence [6 Lectures] 
Communication network design and implementation for federated learning [6 Lectures] 
Application aware communication for IoT devices [6 Lectures] 
 
Textbook  
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Konečný J., McMahan, H.B., Yu, F. X., Richtarik, P., Suresh, A. T., and Bacon, D., Federated Learning: 
Strategies for Improving Communication Efficiency, NIPS Workshop on Private Multi -Party Machine 
Learning 2016. 
2. Bennis, M., Debbah, M. and Poor, H. V., "Ultrareliable and Low-Latency Wireless Communication: Tail, Risk, 
and Scale," in Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 106, no. 10, pp. 1834-1853, Oct. 2018 
3. Machine Learning For Communications Emerging Technologies Initiative, IEEE  
    https://mlc.committees.comsoc.org/research-library/ 
 
  
82 
 
Title Machine Learning for Communications  Number EEL7XXX 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech., M.Tech., Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, Data and 
Computer Communications 
  
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Introduce the area of machine learning in the context of communications   
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Apply machine learning techniques to various signal processing requirements for communications including 
channel estimation, automatic modulation classification and iterative channel decoding.  
 
Contents  
Channel estimation and prediction [14 Lectures]:  
Adaptive transmission systems, The Impact of Outdated CSI, Classical Channel Prediction, Neural Network 
Based Prediction Schemes (5L) 
Flat fading SISO Prediction, Channel -Gain Prediction with Real -Valued and Complex-Valued RNN, Channel 
Envelope Prediction, Frequency-Selective SISO Prediction (5L) 
Performance and Complexity, Computational Complexity (4L) 
Automatic Modulation Classification [10 Lectures]: 
Signal Models for modulation classification (2L) 
Likelihood based classifiers (2L) 
Distribution Test-based classifiers (2L) 
Modulation classification Features (2L) 
Machine Learning models for Modulation classification (2L) 
Channel Encoding and Decoding [18 Lectures]:  
Overview of Channel coding and Deep Learning (3L) 
DNN for Channel coding and to Decoding Directly (5L) 
DNNs for joint equalization and Channel Decoding, CNNs for Decoding (5L) 
Decoding by Eliminating Correlated Channel Noise, BP-CNN Decoding (5L) 
 
Textbook  
1. Zhechen Zhu, Ashoke K. Nandi, Automatic Modulation Classification: Principles, Algorithms     and 
Applications 
2. Luo, F. L., (2020), Machine Learning for Future Wireless Communications, Wiley 
3. He, R., and Ding Z., (2019), Application of Machine Learning in Wireless Communications , The Institution of 
Engineering and Technology 
 
Self Learning Material  
Machine Learning For Communications Emerging Technologies Initiative, IEEE  
https://mlc.committees.comsoc.org/research-library/ 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Jagannatham, A. K., Principles of Communication II, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical 
Engineering,       Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108104098/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
83 
 
Title Delay Tolerant Networks Number EEL7XX 
Department Electrical Engineering/ Computer Science and 
Engineering 
L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech., M. Tech., Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Data Communication Networks, Data and 
Computer Communications 
  
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Expose students to theoretical and practical work and knowledge in the field of Delay -Tolerant Networks   
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Study the problems with networking in networks tolerant of huge delay and with problems in the 
connectivity. 
2. Analysis of protocols and possible application used in DTNs (sensor networks, space commu nications, 
mobile ad-hoc networks) 
 
Contents  
Introduction for Delay-Tolerant Networking (DTN) [3 Lectures] 
Networking in stress and high heterogeneous environments. Asynchronous message sending. Combination of store -and-
forward message switching with physical data transmission/receiving.  [ 5 Lectures] 
Medium access control for delay-tolerant services. Quality of service; streaming control [4 Lectures] 
Modeling of telecommunication traffic; modeling of delays and queues; modeling of delay -tolerant queues. [4 Lectures] 
DTN protocol stack [ 3 Lectures] 
Deterministic and probabilistic routing protocols [5 Lectures] 
DTN Security issues [8 Lectures]: Attacks on DTN (3L), Solution (5L) 
DTN application requirements, Concrete DTN implementations [11 Lectures]: inter-planetary communications (3L), 
submarine communications (2L), sensor networks (3L), mobile ad-hoc networks (3L) 
 
Textbook  
Vasilakos, A. V.,  Zhang, Y., and Spyropoulos, T., (2011), Delay Tolerant Networks: Protocols and Applications, 
CRC Press 
 
Self Learning Material  
Machine Learning For Communications Emerging Technologies Initiative, IEEE  
https://mlc.committees.comsoc.org/research-library/ 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
 
 
 
 
  
84 
 
Title Hardware Aware Communications Number EEL7XX 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech., M. Tech.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, Data and 
Computer Communications, Intelligent Radio 
Networks 
  
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Concepts related to hardware aware communications 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Perform hardware-algorithm co-design for communications. 
 
Contents  
Application aware communication for IoT devices [6 Lectures] 
Joint Sampling, Communication, and Inference [6 Lectures] 
Intelligent communication for heterogeneous hardware constraints  [6 Lectures]  
Transfer learning for different hardware constraints [6 Lectures]  
Hardware-algorithm co-design [6 Lectures] 
Full-Dulplex Radios: Self-Interference Cancellation [6 Lectures] 
Hardware-aware communication protocols [6 Lectures] 
 
Self Learning Material  
Machine Learning For Communications Emerging Technologies Initiative, IEEE  
https://mlc.committees.comsoc.org/research-library/ 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
  
85 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nano and Flexible Electronics Specialization 
 
  
86 
 
Title Introduction To Spintronics  Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide fundamental concepts on spintronics 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the operation of spin based devices 
2. Apply the knowledge for the improvement of spin based devices  
 
Contents  
Introduction: The early history of spin, Quantum Mechanics of spin, Bohr Planetary Model and Space 
Quantization, Bloch sphere, Spin-orbit interaction, exchange interaction (5 Lectures)  
Spin relaxation mechanism, spin relaxation in metals and semiconductors, spin Galvanic effect, spin 
dependent transport and tunneling (5 Lectures) 
Spin Phenomena [6 Lectures]:  
Spin Hall Effect, Galvanic Effect (2 Lectures), Spin Capacitor Effect, Spin Hanle Effect, Spin Seebeck Effect, Spin 
Peltier Effect (4 Lectures) 
Spin Transfer Torque [8 Lectures]: 
Introduction, Spin-transfer drive magnetic dynamics (4 Lectures), Current-driven switching of magnetization, 
Domain wall motion and scattering (4 Lectures) 
Semiconductor Spintronics [9 Lectures]: 
Quantum spin-polarized transport, Pure spin currents, Spin -orbit interaction in semiconductors (4 Lectures), 
Spectral problem of the Rashba Hamiltonian, Geometric spin phases, Diluted magnetic semiconductors (5 
Lectures) 
Spintronic Devices [9 Lectures]:  
Spin diode and transistors, Datta-Das spin-FET, Spin-Valve, spin based bio-sensors (4 Lectures) 
Qubits and introduction to quantum computing (5 Lectures) 
 
Textbooks  
S. Bandyopadhyay, M. Cahay, Introduction to Spintronics. CRC Press, 2nd edition, 2015. 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. S. Datta, Electronic Transport in Mesoscopic Systems. Cambridge University Press, Revised edition, 1997.  
2. Žutić, I., Fabian, J. & Das Sarma, S. Spintronics: fundamentals and applications . Rev. Mod. Phys. 76, 323 –410 
(2004) 
3. David J. Griffiths, Introduction to Quantum Mechanics, Pearson Education, 2nd edition, 2015. 
 
Preparatory Course Material  
Prof. A. Perumal, Spintronics: Physics and Technology , NPTEL Course Material, Department of Physics, Indian 
Institute of Technology Guwahati,  
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/115103039/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
87 
 
Title Flexible and Printed Electronics Number EEL7330 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. IV, M.Tech., Ph.D Type Elective 
Prerequisite Understanding of Electronic Materials and  Devices   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Explain fundamentals of thin-film electronic materials and devices for flexible electronics.  
2.  Teach the concepts for heterogeneous integration of thin-film devices on flexible platforms. 
3.  Will give an overview of the different printing and coating techniques.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Identify the advantages, drawbacks, performances, complementarity and uniqueness of large area 
manufacturing vs. silicon technology 
2.  Integrate the operation principles, architectures and processing of main devices and systems fabricated for 
flexible electronics 
3.  Predict systems integration issues and propose methods for integration and encapsulation of printed devices 
and systems 
 
Contents  
Introduction to Flexible and Printed Electronics (2 Lectures):  
Evolution of Flexible Electronics, review of cutting edge research on flexible, plastic, stretchab le, conformable 
or printed electronics. Materials, components, and systems, applications for IoT  
Materials, Processing, and Manufacturing (12 Lectures):  
Various semiconductors, dielectric, and conducting materials, Organic semiconductors (4 L); From chem ical 
bonds to bands, Charge injection and transport, Examples of printable functional materials , Thin -film 
Deposition and Processing Methods for Flexible Devices (4 L), Solution -based Patterning Processes; Ink -jet 
printing, gravure and other processes, surface energy effects, multilayer patterning (4 L) 
Flexible Thin-Film Transistors and Circuits (14 Lectures):  
Thin-Film Transistor; Device structure and performance, Electrical characteristics, parameter extraction, 
characterization methods for rigid and f lexible devices, electrical stability, printed transistors (5 L); 
Organic/polymer, metal -oxide, electrolyte gated, Case studies, submicrometer OTFTs and gravure printed 
OTFTs (5 L), From transistors to circuits, circuits on flexible and non- silicon substrates, Contacts and Interfaces 
to Organic and Inorganic Electronic Devices, Schottky contacts, defects, carrier recombination, effect of applied 
mechanical strain (4 L) 
Other Flexible Devices and System Integration (14 Lectures):  
Organic Light Emitting Diodes, flexible OLED displays and lighting, smart wallpaper (5 L), Organic Solar Cells, 
sensors, flexible batteries, supercapacitors, logic, memory, RFID tags (5 L), Latest applications, Encapsulation, 
Roll to roll processes, Integration Issues, and Designs for Future (4 L) 
 
Textbook 
1. Nisato, G.,  Lupo, D., Ganz, S. (Editors) (2016), Organic and Printed Electronics: Fundamentals and Applications, 
1st Edition, CRC Press 
2. Caironi, M., Noh, Y-Y., (Editors) (2015), Large Area and Flexible Electronics, 2nd Edition, WILEY-VCH 
3. Wong, W. S., and Salleo, A., (Editors) (2009) Flexible electronics: Materials and Applications, 1st Edition, Springer 
 
Self Learning Material  
Recent Papers form Flexible and Printed Electronics area, IEEE, IOP, AIP, RSC and others  
 
88 
 
Title Advanced Compact Modeling Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Specialization Core 
Prerequisite Physics and Modeling of the MOS 
Transistors 
  
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide understanding of industry standard compact modeling techniques  
2. Introduce SPICE simulations  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Identify best compact modeling approach for their problem 
2. Develop own compact models and use them in circuit simulations 
 
Contents  
Introduction to TCAD Simulations, SPICE simulations and Compact Modeling (3 Lectures)  
Resistor and Diode Modeling [7 Lectures]:  
Semiconductor resistors, 2-terminal resistor model, 3-terminal resistor model (4 Lectures) 
JUNCAP2 diode model, charge and capacitance models, diode breakdown model (3 Lectures)  
Compact Modeling Techniques [7 Lectures]:  
Charge based, threshold voltage based and surface potential -based modeling of MOS transistor, table look-
up-based models (4 Lectures) 
Developing analytical solutions, error margin. Accessing in -built compact models inside simulators (3 
Lectures) 
Advanced Multi-Gate Devices [7 Lectures]:  
Introduction to FinFETs, Charge based modeling of FinFETs (4 Lectur es) 
Introduction to Gate-All-Around Transistors and modeling (3 Lectures) 
Parameter Extraction and Benchmark Testing: Importance of parameter extraction and extraction procedure. 
Symmetry tests for DC and capacitances, harmonic balance test, slope-ratio tests, gm/Id test. (4 Lectures) 
 
Textbooks  
1. G. Gildenblat, Compact Modeling: Principles, Techniques and Applications. Springer, 2010.  
2. W. Liu, MOSFET Models for SPICE Simulation: Including BSIM3v3 and BSIM4, Wiley, 2001 
 
Self Learning Material  
Research papers on semiconductor device modeling 
 
Preparatory Course Material  
K. Kundert, Designer’s Guide to SPICE and SPECTRE, Springer, 1995 
 
  
89 
 
Title Quantum Nanoelectronics Number  
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [E] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. 4th Year Type Elective Course 
Prerequisite Semiconductor Devices   
Objectives  
The Instructor will : 
1. Each the fundamentals of quantum nanoelectronics 
2. Explain the nano structures classifications and transport mechanism in quantum structures  
3. Briefly teach the fabrication and characterization of Nanoelectronic Devices  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Have a deeper understanding of Nanostructures 
2.  Understand the basic concepts of Nanoelectronic devices  
 
Contents   
Introduction and review of electronic technology (5 lectures): 
Electronics to nanoelectronics, particles, waves and Schrodinger Equation, quantum wells, wires and dots, 
quantum description of metals, semiconductors, junction devices                                                                                                                   
Building blocks for nanoelectronic devices (15 lectures):  
Fabrication and characterization methods for nanoelectronics (5 L); FET – size limits and alternative forms, 
devices based on electron tunneling, resonant tunnel diodes (5 L); Single electron transistors, molecular 
electronics, hybrid electronics (5 L) 
Transport of charge in Nanostructures under Electric field (8 lectures):  
Parallel transport, hot electrons, perpendicular transport (4 L), Quantum transport in nanostructures, Coulomb 
blockade (4 L) 
Transport of charge in magnetic field (5 lectures):  
Effect of magnetic field on a crystal. Aharonov -Bohm effect, the Shubnikov -de Hass effect, the quantum Hall 
effect.                                           
Alternate Devices (9 lectures):  
Structure and properties of h eterojunction devices (4 L), Heterostructure semiconductor laser, Quantum well 
laser, quantum dot LED, quantum dot laser, Quantum well optical modulator (5 L)  
 
Textbook  
1. Martinez-Duart J. M., Martin P alma R. J., Rueda F. A., (2006), Nanotechnology for Microelectronics and 
optoelectronics, Elsevier 
2. Fahrner W. R., (2005), Nanotechnology and Nanoelectronics, Springer 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Nanoelectronics: Devices and Materials, Centre for Nanoscience and Engineering, IISc Bangalore, NPTEL 
Course,  https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117108047/ 
 
  
90 
 
Title Non-Volatile Memory Technologies Number  
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Compulsory 
/Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide background knowledge of advanced non-volatile memory technologies.  
2. Teach the students about emerging memory devices and applications.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Describe the structure and operation of non-volatile devices, and challenges associated with them 
2.  Explain the physics with new structures such RRAM devices 
3.  Understand the operation of new memory technologies and related circuits.  
 
Contents  
Memory Development for CMOS (8 Lectures): 
Historical Progress in Data Storage Devices and Techniques for Computing and CMOS, Scaling of Memory 
and ITRS (4 L), Memory Types and Hierarchy, Static and Dynamic Memory Designs, NAND and NOR Flash 
Memory, Fabrication Techniques (4 L)  
 
Emerging Non-Volatile Memory Technologies (20 Lectures): 
Non-volatile memory technologies and their properties, Magnetoresistive Random Access Memory (MRAM), 
Phase change RAM (PCRAM), Ferroelectric RAM (FeRAM) (5 L), Resis tive RAM (RRAM), Applications of 
RRAM, Fabrication and Process Considerations (5L); Memristers, Synapse, RRAM devices and Memristers 
for Neuromorphic Applications (5 L);  Design implications of emerging non -volatile memory (NVM) 
technologies, in-memory computing (5 L) 
 
Textbook  
1. Hu, C. (2010), Modern Semiconductor Devices for Integrated Circuits, Prentice Hall.  
2. Suri, M. (2020), Applications of Emerging Memory Technology, Springer.     
 
Self Learning Material 
Recent Papers on Emerging Memory Technologies 
 
  
91 
 
Title Semiconductor Optoelectronics Number  
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [E] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective Course 
Prerequisite Semiconductor Devices   
Objectives  
The Instructor will : 
1. Provide students an understanding of operation of semiconductor optoelectronic devices. 
2. Teach students heterojunctions and quantum wells and their application to optoelectronic devices.  
3. Teach students design, analysis, & modelling of semiconductor LEDs and lasers.  
4. Teach students design of various types of photodetectors and optical fibers 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Be familiarized with optoelectronics devices and understand the physical principle behind this.  
2. Design single-mode junction lasers at different wavelengths to meets specs. 
3. Design junction & avalanche photodiodes to meet specs  
4. Incorporate heterostructures and quantum wells to improve device performance devices.   
 
Contents   
Compound Semiconductors [6 Lectures]:  
Semiconductor optoelectronic materials, Structures (2L) 
Fermi level and quasi Fermi levels, band gap modification(4L) 
Semiconductor Photon Sources [4 Lectures]:  Interaction of photons with electrons and holes in a semiconductor, 
Rates of emission and absorption, Luminescence 
Quantum structures in semiconductors [4 Lectures]: Quantum wells, quantum dots, quantum wires. 
Light Emitting diodes [5 Lectures]: materials, structure and device characteristics 
Semiconductor Laser[9 Lectures]:  
Dasic structure, theory and device characteristics, DFB, DBR (5L) 
Quantum well and VCSE Lasers, Laser diode arrays(4L) 
Semiconductor Photodetectors [6 Lectures]:  Types of photodetectors: photoconductors and photodiodes, PIN 
diodes and Avalanche photodetectors and their characteristics 
Solar cells [4 Lectures]: Basic principle, current voltage characteristics, Spectral response, Heterojunction and 
cascaded solar cells. 
Optics [4 Lectures]: Integrated optics, Optical fibers and their characteristics, Fiber optic communication systems 
                                                                                                         
Textbooks  
1. Sze S. M., (2001), Physics of Semiconductor Devices, John Wiley & Sons. 
2. Streetman B. G., Banerjee S. K., (2007), Solid State Electronic Devices, Pearson Education Asia. 
3. Bhattacharya P., (1993), Semiconductor Optoelectronics devices, Pearson Education 
 
 
 
  
92 
 
Title Organic Optoelectronics Number  
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Compulsory /Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide fundamental understanding of the optical and electronic properties of organic materials and 
devices 
2. Teach the students the basics of the emerging technological area of printed flexible optoelectronics 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Demonstrate understanding of the various key classes of organic optoelectronics, their basic device 
structures as well as identify their fundamental advantages and disadvantages 
2. Propose an appropriate characterization technique in order to characterize a specific property relating to 
the material and the targeted application  
3. Apply the knowledge of an enabling technology meeting the needs of society, in the fie ld of organic 
electronics and nanotechnology 
 
Contents  
 
Organic Molecules and Molecular Solids (5 Lectures) : Electronic structure of atoms, Atomic and Molecular 
Orbitals, LCAO, Bonding and antibondig orbitals, Covalent Bond, Sigma and Pi Bonds, Energy Levels, 
Spectroscopic properties, Aggregates, Van der Waals Bonding, Hydrogen Bonding  
Photophysics and Conduction (9 Lectures):  
Excited states: Absorption and emission, Singlet and triplet states, Radiative and non -radiative transitions, 
Dimer, Eximers; E xcitons: Wannier Exciton, Charge -transfer Exciton Frenkel Exciton, Exciton Diffusion, 
Excitonic Energy Transfer (5 L); Conduction in Organic Solids: Conductivity: carrier concentration versus 
mobility, Carrier generation, Hopping transport, Mobility measurements, Traps. (4 L) 
Flat panel display technologies and Lasers (12 Lectures):  
Physics of liquid -crystal displays; organic light -emitting diodes: materials, devices and applications (4 L); 
fundamentals of radiometry, Organic Light Emitting Transistors (4 L), Lasing Action in Organic 
Semiconductors: Lasing Process, Optically Pumped Organic Lasers, Electrical Pumping of Organic Lasers (4 
L).  
Photovoltaics and Photodetectors (8 Lectures):  
Photovoltaic Devices, Organic Heterojunction Photovoltaic Cells, Organic/Nanorod hybrid Photovoltaics (4 
L), Gratzel Cells (Dye sensitized solar cells), Photodetector Devices (4 L)  
Essential Fabrication Technology (8 Lectures):  Film Formation Techniques: Spin coating,  Langmuir -Blodget, 
Evaporation, Chemical Vapor Phase Deposition (4 L), Printing and coating techniques, Ink -Jet Printing, Self-
Assembly, Introduction to modern xerography (4 L) 
 
Textbook  
Hu, W., (Editor), (2013), Organic Optoelectronics, 1st Edition, Wiley-VCH 
 
Self Learning Material 
Recent Papers on topics such as OLEDs, OLETs and OPVs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
93 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Smart Grid Specialization 
 
  
94 
 
 
Title Introduction to Smart Grid Number EE7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech./M.Tech/Ph.D. Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Power Engineering (for B.Tech. students)   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide concepts and topics that are relevant to smart grid technologies to facilitate exploring research 
opportunities 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Understand the basic concepts of smart grid development and the critical technologies that underpin such 
development, their basic principles, physical constraints, and technological potentials  
 
Contents  
 
Smart Grid Basics: Evolution of Electric Power Grid and Smart Grid, Objectives, main features and challenges 
of smart grid (5 lectures) 
Energy Resources:  Centralized vs. distributed generation (1 lecture); renewable energy: solar, wind, 
hydropower, biomass, geothermal, ocean wave; benefit, costs, and p olicies of renewable energy (5 lectures); 
renewable sources integration – overcoming intermittence; storage systems technology (4 lectures)  
Plug-in Electric Vehicle (PEV): History of EV; PEV challenges and potential solutions (1 lecture); EV and electric 
power grid; PEV charging infrastructure, challenges and solutions (4 lectures); PEV as an energy storage 
device and an energy source (V2G) (2 lectures) 
Demand-side management: Load profile of the power grid; market pricing (3 lectures); peak shaving and valley 
filling; load forecasting (4 lectures); regulations and policies (3 lectures)  
Monitoring and Protection:  Wide-area monitoring system (WAMS), SCADA and PMU (4 lectures); a dvanced 
metering infrastructure (AMI); smart metering (3 lectures); communication infrastructure and technologies 
(3 lectures) 
 
 
Textbook  
1. Bollean,M.H.J., Hasan,F., (2011), Integration of Distributed Generation in the Power Systems , Willey -IEEE 
India Press 
2. Ehsani,M., Gao,Y., Gay,S.E., Emadi,A., (2005), Modern Electric, Hybrid Electric, and Fuel Cell Vehicles: 
Fundamentals, Theory, and Design, CRC Press 
3.  Bansal,R., (2019), Power System Protection in Smart Grid Environment, CRC Press 
 
Self Learning Material 
The Smart Grid: An Introduction, 
http://www.oe.energy.gov/SmartGridIntroduction.htm, Department of Energy, 2008.  
 
 
 
  
95 
 
Title Renewable Energy Systems Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide exposure to operation of various non -conventional energy sources, their characteristics, and their 
interface with grid 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Design and develop standalone and grid connected renewable energy systems  
 
Contents  
Solar PV: Solar PV characteristics, cell, module, array, series parallel combination, partial shading, MPPT (3 
lectures), grid synchronization using various converter topologies (3 lectures) 
Solar Thermal: Principle of operation, thermal efficiency, concentrators-architecture, applications (4 lectures) 
Wind Energy Systems:  Principle of operation, types of wind turbines, Cp -λ characteristics, Betz limit, MPPT, 
onshore and offshore wind farms (4 lectures), types of wind generators-operation and control of various types 
of generators (6 lectures) 
Hydro Power Generation: Hydro systems, hydro resources, types of hydro turbine, small, mini and micro hydro 
systems, pumped storage (6 lectures) 
Fuel Cells: Types, principle of operation, V-I characteristics, applications (4 lectures) 
Other Renewable Energy Sources: Introduction to geothermal, ocean, biomass energy generation (6 lectures)  
Energy Storage Systems: Introduction to various mechanical, chemical, electro-chemical, and electrical storage 
systems and their applications (6 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Bollean,M.H.J., Hasan,F., (2011), Integration of Distributed Generation in the Power Systems, Willey-IEEE India 
Press 
2. Masters,G.M., (2004), Renewable and Efficient Electric Power Systems, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
3. Bhadra,S.N., Kastha,D., Banerjee, S., (2005), Wind Electrical Systems, Oxford Univ. Press 
 
 
  
96 
 
Title Power Quality Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 
Offered for B.Tech./M.Tech/Ph.D. Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Introduction to Electrical Engineering    
Objectives 
The Instructor will provide knowledge of: 
1. Various Power quality issues and their origin 
2. Impact of various power quality problems on appliances  
3. Various compensators/filters used for mitigating different PQ issues  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have ability to: 
1. Identify the sources of various power quality problems. 
2. Estimate the impact of various power quality problems on appliances.  
3. Decide the compensators and filters to keep the power quality indices within the standards  
 
Contents  
Overview and definition of power quality (PQ) : Sources of pollution and regulations (2 lectures), power quality 
problems, rapid voltage fluctuations voltage unbalance, voltage dips and voltage swells, short duration 
outages (4 lectures) 
Definitions Voltage sag analysis and mitigation: Sag caused by motor starting, sag caused by utility fault clearing, 
sag mitigation, sag magnitude and duration calculations, RMS voltage, calculation in 1 -phase systems (6 
lectures) 
Harmonics: Effects-within the power system, interference with communication harmonic measurements, 
harmonic elimination (4 lectures) 
Harmonic distortion: Overview of power system harmonics, harmonic analysis, harmonic sources -the static 
converters, transformer magnetization and non -linearities, rota ting machines, arc furnaces, fluorescent 
lighting (5 lectures), total harmonic distortion, rms and average value calculations, effects of harmonic 
distortion (3 lectures) 
Monitoring power quality: Monitoring essentials, power quality measuring equipment, current industry trends 
(4 lectures) 
Textbook  
1. Kennedy,B.W., (2000), Power Quality Primer, McGrawHill. 
2. Dugan,R.C., Mcgranaghan,M.F., Santoso,S., Beaty,H.W., (2002), Electrical Power System Quality, 
McGrawHill. 
3. Bollen,M.H.J., (2007), Understanding Power Quality Problems: Voltage Sag and Interruptions, IEEE Press. 
 
  
97 
 
 
Title Power System Protection Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Power System Analysis and Stability   
Objectives 
The Instructor will provide knowledge of: 
1.  Various protection schemes and their applications in power industry  
2.  Relay coordination, instrument transformers 
3.  Numerical protection schemes based on signal processing techniques  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Design/propose protection schemes for various power system components based on digital signal 
processing 
2. Design relay coordination systems in distribution and transmission  
 
Contents  
Overview of Power System Protection: Architecture of protection system, evolution of relays, zones of protections, 
concept of primary and back-up protection (2 lectures) 
Overcurrent Protection:  Principles of fuse and overcurrent protection and application to feede r and motor 
protection, relay coordination in distribution system (6 lectures) 
Distance Protection:  Principles of distance relaying (2 lectures) and application to transmission system 
protection, relay coordination (5 lectures) 
Differential Protection: Principles of differential protection (2 lectures) and application to transformer, bus bar 
and generator armature winding protection (5 lectures) 
Introduction to Digital Relaying: Sampling, concept of moving window, signal conditioning, signal processing (4 
lectures) 
Instrument Transformer: Current and voltage transformers in power system protection (6 lectures)  
Circuit breakers:  Arc initiation and quenching, oil circuit breakers, air blast circuit breakers vacuum circuit 
breakers, SF6 circuit breakers (5 lectures), current chopping, reverse recovery voltage (3 lectures) 
Lightning arresters: Principle of operation and types (2 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Singh, L.P., (2017), Digital Protection: Protective Relaying from Electromechanical to Microprocessor , 2nd Edition, 
New Age International Publications 
2. Ram,B., Vishwakarma,D.N., (2017), Power System Protection and Switchgear , 2nd Edition, Tata McGraw Hill 
Publications. 
3. Phadke,A.G., Thorp,J.S., (2009), Computer relaying for Power System , 2 nd Edition, John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 
Publications 
 
Self Learning Material 
Soman,S.A.,  Power System Protection,  NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian 
Institute of Technology Bombay, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/101/108101039/   
 
  
98 
 
 
Title Power System Dynamics and Control Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech./M.Tech/Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Power System Analysis and Stability (for B.Tech 
student) 
  
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide exposure to dynamic behaviour of synchronous machines under small and large disturbances and 
the concept of voltage stability in a power system 
2.  Provide exposure to the mathematical methods of improving system stability  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Design and implement techniques to control a power system 
2.  Design control techniques/stabilizers to improve the system stability  
 
Contents  
Introduction to stability problem: Rotor angle stability, voltage stability, mid-term and long-term stability, small 
signal stability, transient stability, oscillatory and non-oscillatory instability (2 lectures) 
Modeling of synchronous machine: synchronous machine parameters, dq-axis modeling, voltage equations, per-
unit modeling, equivalent circuit, dq-axis time constants, swing equations (4 lectures), synchronous machine 
representation in stability students, capability curve of an alternator (3 lectures)  
Excitation systems:  Elements, typ es, dynamic performance measures, control and protective functions (5 
lectures), modeling of excitation systems (2 lectures) 
Governor modeling and automatic generation control: Turbine, governor modeling, isochronous governor, speed-
droop characteristics, automatic generation control (3 lectures) 
Small signal stability analysis: Eigen properties, participation and sensitivity analysis (3 lectures), SMIB system, 
synchronizing and damping torque, K1-K6 model (5 lectures), PSS design and types (2 lectures) 
Transient stability analysis: Equal area criteria, direct method of transient stability analysis (5 lectures)  
Voltage stability issues:  PV characteristics, voltage collapse phenomenon, prevention of voltage collapse (5 
lectures) 
Sub synchronous oscillations: Torsional oscillations in multi-mass turbine, interactions with nearby dc systems 
(3 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Kundur,P., (1994), Power System Stability and Control, McGraw Hill 
2. Machowski,J., Bialek,J., Bumby,J.R., (2008), Power Systems Dynamics, Stability and Control, 2nd Edition, John 
Wiley. 
 
Self Learning Material 
Kothari,M.L.,  Power System Dynamics, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical Engineering, 
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/102/108102080/   
 
  
99 
 
Title HVDC and FACTS Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech./M.Tech./Ph.D. Type Elective  
Prerequisite Power System Analysis and Stability, Power Electronics 
(for B.Tech students) 
  
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Present the need and operational aspects of HVDC transmission systems along with their associated 
    converters and their control 
2. Provide concepts of series and shunt compensation to enhance the performance of transmission lines and 
stability of Power System using FACTS devices  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Develop converters and their control methods in HVDC transmission systems 
2. Develop converter topologies and their control methods for FACTS devices  
 
Contents  
Introduction: Introduction of DC power transmission technology, comparison of AC and DC transmission, 
advantages, limitations and types of HVDC transmission systems (3 lectures) 
LCC HVDC systems: Ignition angle, commutation overlap, relation between AC and DC quantities (4 lectures)  
Control of HVDC systems: CIA, CC, CEA characteristics, current limits (3 lectures) 
Harmonics and filters: AC and DC side harmonics (3 lectures) 
Interaction with AC system:  Effective Short Circuit Ratio, dynamic overvoltage, voltage stability, harmonic 
resonance (2 lectures) 
Introduction to VSC HVDC systems:  Introduction to VSC HVDC systems, voltage an alysis, active and reactive 
power flow, control of VSC HVDC systems (3 lectures) 
FACTS devices: Objectives of compensation, types of compensation (2 lectures)  
Shunt compensators : TCR, TSR, TSC, SVC and STATCOM - principle of operation, modeling, and contro l (6 
lectures) 
Series compensation: SSSC, TSSC, TCSC, and TCSR - principle of operation, modeling, and control (6 lectures) 
Voltage and phase angle regulators : Thyristor controlled voltage and phase angle regulators - principle of 
operation, modeling, and control (4 lectures) 
Power flow controllers – UPFC and IPFC - principle of operation, modeling, and control (6 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Padiyar,K.R., (2017), HVDC Power Transmission Systems, 3rd Edition, New Age Publishers 
2. Hingorani,L.G., Gyugyi,L., (2000), Understanding FACTS: Concepts and Technology of Flexible AC Transmission 
Systems, IEEE Press 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Singh,S.N.,  High Voltage DC Transmission, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical Engineering, 
Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/104/108104013/ 
2.  Bhattacharya,A.,  Facts Devices,  NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical and Electronics 
Engineering, IIT Roorkee, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/107/108107114/ 
 
 
  
100 
 
 
Title Power System Restructuring Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech./M.Tech./Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Power Engineering (for BTech students)   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide understanding of economics of a restructured power system  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Model markets, calculate and analyze price associated with power generation and transmission in a 
restructured power system 
 
Contents  
Introduction: Reasons and objectives for restructuring of power industry - Indian and global scenario, 
restructuring process, entities involved, market place mechanisms (4 lectures) 
Fundamentals of Economics : Introduction, consumer and suppliers behavior, market equilibrium, costs of 
production, competitive market (5 lectures) 
Market Models : Introduction, models based on  contractual agreement, comparisons of market models, 
electricity vs. other commodities (4 lectures) 
Transmission Congestion Management : Introduction, classification of congestion management methods, ATC, 
non-market methods, nodal pricing, inter -zonal intr a-zonal congestion management, capacity alleviation 
method (6 lectures) 
Locational Marginal Prices : Fundamentals, LMP formulation implementation, LMP using AC and DC OPF (4 
lectures) 
Ancillary Service Management: Type, services related to load-generation balancing, voltage and reactive power, 
black start capability service, co-optimization of energy and reserve services (4 lectures) 
Pricing of transmission network usage and loss allocation : Principles and methods of transmission pricing, 
classification of transmission pricing methods, database issues in transmission pricing, loss allocation methods, 
comparison (5 lectures) 
Market power and generators bidding : Attributes of a perfectly competitive market, the firm’s supply decision 
under perfect competition, imperfect competition, market power, financial markets, introduction to optimal 
bidding by a generator company, optimal bidding methods (6 lectures)  
Global and Indian energy market evolution : Global markets - ERCOT, PJM, Nordic power markets, need of 
standard market design, Indian market framework, reform initiatives, ABT, electricity acts (4 lectures)  
 
Textbook  
1. Kirschen,D., Strbac,G., (2004), Fundamentals of Power System economics, John Wiley & Sons Ltd 
2. Hunt,S., (2002), Making competition work in electricity, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 
3. Lai,L.L., (2001), Power System Restructuring and Deregulation: Trading, Performance and Information Technology , 
John Wiley & Sons Ltd 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Abhyankar,A.R., Khaparde,S.A.,  Restructured Power Systems, NPTEL Course Material, 
     https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/101/108101005/ 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
101 
 
Title Power Quality Mitigation Techniques Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech./M.Tech./Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Power Electronics, Power Quality (for B.Tech 
students), Power Quality (for M.Tech. students) 
  
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide an understanding of various techniques and components used to improve the power quality in 
distribution networks 
  
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Design topologies and control methods to mitigate power quality disturbances using active and passive filters 
 
Contents  
Introduction: Representation of harmonics, waveform, active, reactive and harmonic power, THD, distortion 
power, power factor (4 lectures) 
Power components in three-phase circuits: 𝛼𝛽0coordinates, instantaneous active and reactive power in three-phase 
balanced circuits, three-phase unbalanced circuit analysis using symmetrical components, power calculation 
in unbalanced and non-sinusoidal three phase systems (6 lectures) 
Fundamentals of load compensation: Power factor improvement, voltage regulation (3 lectures), phas e balancing 
using symmetrical components (5 lectures) 
Theory of shunt compensation : State space modeling of compensator, switching control (3 lectures), reactive 
power theory, theory of instantaneous symmetrical components (5 lectures)  
Theory of series compensation: Principle of operation and control of dynamic voltage restorer (6 lectures)  
Unified power quality conditioner: Principle of operation of UPQC (4 lectures) 
Harmonics suppression with passive filters: Types of filters and their design (6 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Ghosh,A., Ledwich,G., (2002), Power Quality Enhancement Using Custom Power Devices, Springer 
Science+Business Media 
2. Sankaran,C., (2002), Power Quality, CRC Press 
3. Akagi,H., Watanabe,E.H., Aredes,M., (2017), Instantaneous Power Theory and Applications to Power 
Conditioning, Wiley-IEEE Press 
Self Learning Material 
1. Kumar,M.,  Power Quality in Power Distribution Systems,  NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical 
Engineering, IIT Madras, 
     https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/106/108106025/ 
2. Bhattacharya,A.,  Power Quality Improvement Technique, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical and 
Electronics Engineering, IIT Roorkee, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/107/108107157/ 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
102 
 
Title Plugin Electric Vehicles Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–2 [4] 
Offered for B.Tech./M.Tech./Ph.D. Type Elective  
Prerequisite Power Electronics, Introduction to Smart Grid 
(for B.Tech students), Introduction to Smart Grid 
(for M.Tech students) 
  
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide understanding of various technologies of plugin electric vehicle and hybrid electric vehicle and their 
role in smart grid operation 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Design powertrain circuit topology and appropriate control scheme for electric vehicle  
2.  Understand and design EV charging infrastructure 
 
Contents  
Introduction to EV: Recent development trends, types of electric vehicles (2 lectures) 
Powertrain: Concepts of powertrain sizing in EV and PHEV, starting, braking (6 lectures)  
Storage systems: Battery types, parameters, battery modeling, battery management (5 lectures)  
Charging Infrastructure : Domestic cha rging infrastructure, public charging infrastructure, normal charging 
station, occasional charging station, fast charging station, battery swapping station (5 lectures), types of 
charging: constant voltage, constant current, pulse charging, inductive, cond uctive charging (3 lectures) 
Vehicle-to-X systems : Vehicle -to-grid, vehicle -to-home (5 lectures), vehicle -to-building, vehicle -to-vehicle (3 
lectures) 
Hybrid Electric Vehicle: Configuration of HEV (series, parallel, series-parallel & complex), power flow control in 
HEV configurations, control (6 lectures) 
Vehicle Communication: Introduction to in-vehicle communications and controller area network (4 lectures)  
PEV integration: Impact on transmission and distribution network (3 lectures)  
 
Laboratory: Experiments related to the following topics will be conducted under laboratory component:  
SoC estimation, control of electric vehicle drives, regenerative braking, powertrain and vehicle dynamics, EV 
chargers and their control, vehicle -to-grid technology, vehicle-to-vehicle technology, EV charging from solar 
PV, performance of aggregator, Use of simulation tools (MATLAB, SIEMENS EV related softwares) to simulate 
different subsystems of EV and different scenarios. 
 
Textbook  
1. Husain,I., (2011), Electric and Hybrid Vehicles Design Fundamentals, 2nd Edition, CRC Press 
2. Ehsani,M., Gao,Y., Emadi,A., (2011), Modern Electric, Hybrid Electric, and Fuel Cell Vehicles Fundamentals, 
Theory and Design, 2nd Edition, CRC Press 
3. Larminie,J., Lowry,J., (2003), Electric Vehicle Technology Explained, Wiley 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Jain,A.K.,  Electric Vehicles - Part 1, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical Engineering, IIT Delhi,  
     https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/102/108102121/ 
2. Kumar,P., Majhi,S., Introduction to Hybrid and Electric Vehicles,  NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Electronics and Communication Engineering, IIT Guwahati, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/103/108103009/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
103 
 
Title Power System Reliability and Security Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech./M.Tech./Ph.D. Type Elective  
Prerequisite Power System Operation and Control (for B.Tech 
students) 
  
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide in depth understanding of reliability and security aspects of generation, transmission, and distribution 
systems 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Develop methods to enhance the reliability of supply and security of power system components 
 
Contents  
Introduction:Concept of power system reliability and security. methods of assessment, cost, probabilistic 
reliability criteria (4 lectures) 
Generating capacity reliability:Probability methods- generation model, loss of load indices, loss of energy indices 
(6 lectures), frequency and duration method- generation model, system risk indices (4 lectures) 
Interconnected systems: Evaluation techniques for multi -interconnected systems, factors affecting emerg ency 
assistance, frequency and duration method (6 lectures) 
Operating reserve:Various methods of estimation, security function approach, response risk (4 lectures)  
Composite generation and transmission systems: Network configurations, state selection, syste m and load point 
indices, data requirements (5 lectures) 
Distribution system reliability : Networks configurations, evaluation techniques (5 lectures), indices and factors 
affecting reliability (3 lectures) 
Power system security: Security analysis, security assessment, contingency analysis, algorithms to determine 
system security, security assessment based on performance index (5 lectures)  
 
Textbook  
1. Billinton,R., Allan,R.N., (1986), Reliability Evaluation of Power Systems, 2nd Edition, Springer US 
2. Billinton,R., Ringlee,R.J., Wood,A.J., (1973), Power-System Reliability Calculations, MIT Press 
3. Singh,C., Jirutitijaroen,P., Mitra,J., (2018), Electric Power Grid Reliability Evaluation: Models and Methods, Wiley-
IEEE Press 
 
 
  
104 
 
Title Selected Topics in Distributed Generation Number EE7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech./M.Tech./Ph.D. Type Elective  
Prerequisite Power Electronics, Renewable Energy Systems (for 
B.Tech students) 
  
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide salient concepts of DG operation and control in both grid connected and autonomous modes  
2.  Provide exposure to the challenges related to stability, grid integration, and ancillary services in distributed 
generation 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Develop control schemes for distributed generators to operate in grid connected and autonomous mode  
2. Understand various challenges and propose solutions related to stability, grid integration and ancil lary 
services in distributed generation 
 
Contents  
Distributed generation : Introduction, DG types, concept of inertia and frequency response, flexibility issues, 
ramping issues (3 lectures) 
Control of distributed generation: Typical distributed energy sour ces (1 lecture), their modelling (5 lectures) and 
control(4 lectures) 
Microgrids: Concept of microgrid, microgrid benefits, typical structures and configurations of various 
microgrids (3 lectures), control of converters in DC and AC microgrids (4 lectures) , active and reactive power 
control, voltage and frequency control of inverter-based sources (3 lectures), virtual synchronous generators (2 
lectures) 
Stability: Stability issues with weak grid integration and in microgrid operation (4 lectures)  
Other challenges in grid integration: Power quality requirements, DG support under abnormal grid conditions (3 
lectures), issues related to islanding and reverse power flow, network congestion (5 lectures), and protection 
(2 lectures) 
Ancillary services: Ancillary services with DGs, control for ancillary services, virtual power plants (3 lectures)  
 
Textbook  
1. Bollean,M.H.J., Hasan,F., (2011), Integration of Distributed Generation in the Power Systems , Willey-IEEE India 
Press 
2. Masters,G.M., (2004), Renewable and Efficient Electric Power Systems, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
3. Bevrani,H., Francois,B., Ise,T., (2017), Microgrid Dynamics and Control, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
 
 
 
  
105 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VLSI Systems 
 
 
 
  
106 
 
Course Title Hardware Design for Artificial Intelligence Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech, M. Tech., Ph.D. Type Core 
Pre-requisite Artificial Intelligence, Digital and Analog 
Design. 
  
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Enable students to learn the concepts of Hardware Design for Artificial Intelligence. 
2. Provide exposure to the students about architectures and hardware co-design for AI. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
Students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply fundamental principles of ANN and DNN to hardware architectures. 
2. Implement the basic designs for computing hardware for AI. 
 
Contents: 
Hardware Design for Artificial-Intelligence: Basics of Artificial Intelligence, Moore’s law in context of AI, Need 
of fast computational resources, Hardware for training, Architectural Challenges for Training, Memory 
Challenges, Floating point accuracy. (4 Lectures) 
Modern AI Hardware: CPUs, GPUs, FPGAs, Specialized accelerators, CPU vs. GPU: Speed, Power and 
Bandwidth. (5 Lectures) 
AI Accelerators and Processors: DNN Accelerators and Architectures, Data reuse, Low-cost spatial architectures, 
Energy efficient dataflow, Datapath Taxonomy, Synchronization for parallel processing.(5 Lectures)  
Computing in AI Hardware: Highly-Parallel Compute Paradigms, High-performance matrix multipliers: Systolic 
arrays; Reinforcement Learning for Hardware Design.(5 Lectures)  
Performance Parameters: Implementation of Deep Learning Kernels; Evaluating Performance, Energy efficiency, 
Parallelism, Locality,Memory hierarchy, Roofline model: Multicore Architectures. (5 Lectures) 
Hardware Optimization for AI: Bitwidth optimization, Nonlinear Quantization, Binary Nets, Log-Domain 
Computation. (5 Lectures) 
Compact Network Architectures: Key Metrics for Embedded DNN, Sparse-Matrix Vector DSP, Compact 
Network Architectures (5 Lectures) 
Industry Standards and State -of-the Art: Study of state -of-the art accelerators such as Eyeriss(MIT), Intel Xeon, 
Intel Neural Compute Stick.(5 Lectures) 
Other accelerators from Microsoft and IBM.(3 Lectures) 
 
Text References 
Sze,V. et al., "Efficient Processing of Deep Neural Networks: A Tutorial and Survey," Proceedings of the IEEE,  
vol. 105, no. 12, pp. 2295-2329, Dec. 2017. 
 
Preparatory course material 
1.  Chen,Y.-H. et al., "Eyeriss: An Energy-Efficient Reconfigurable Accelerator for Deep 
     Convolutional Neural Networks, "IEEE International Conference on Solid-State Circuits           
     (ISSCC), pp. 262-264, February 2016. 
2.  https://www.eecs.mit.edu/academics-admissions/subject-updates-fall-2017/6s0826888 
3.  https://cs217.stanford.edu/ 
4.  https://towardsdatascience.com/neural-network-architectures-156e5bad51ba 
 
Additional Reading 
Zhang,Q.J., Gupta,K.C., Neural Networks for RF and Microwave Design. Artech House Publishers, Boston, MA, 
USA, 2000. 
  
107 
 
Course Title VLSI Testing Number EEL7XX0 
 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 
Offered for B.Tech., M. Tech., Ph.D. Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite High-level Synthesis, VLSI Design   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Enable students to learn the concepts of testing and verification techniques used for VLSI integrated circuits. 
2. Provide exposure to the students about complexity of VLSI testing in high -density VLSI chips in present 
scenario. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
Students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply principles of VLSI testing and verification for digital designs.  
2. Implement the test patterns and circuitry for reasonably advanced logic circuits.  
 
Contents 
Basics of VLSI Testing: Introduction to Digital VLSI Design flow; VLSI Testing needs and challenges; Review 
of High-Level Synthesis, Scheduling, Allocation and Binding; Basics of VLSI testing, Flow of testing and 
verification; VLSI Testing Process, Equipment and Economics. (6 Lectures) 
Fault Modeling: Faults and fault models, fault detection and redundancy, Yield and Fault Equivalence, Fault 
location, Fault dominance, Fault Simulation. (6 Lectures) 
Automatic test pattern generation: Automatic test pattern generation (ATPG), Combinational ATPG, Sequential 
ATPG. (4 Lectures) 
Design-for-testability: Design-for-testability (DFT), Testability Measures, Scan design, Test interface and 
boundary scan, JTAG, Delay fault testing. (5 Lectures)  
BIST: Built in Self Test (BIST) for testing of logic and memories, Test automation. (3 Lectures)  
New trends in Testing, Testing challenges for SoCs. (4 Lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. M. Bushnell and V. D. Agrawal, Essentials of Electronic Testing for Digital, Memory and Mixed Signal VLSI 
Circuits. Springer, 2005. 
2. T. Kropf, Introduction to Formal Hardware Verification. Springer Verlag, 2000.  
3. N. H. E. Weste, D. Harris and A. Banerjee, CMOS VLSI Design: A Circuits and Systems Perspective.  Pearson, 
3rd edition, 2006. 
 
Preparatory course material 
1. M. Abramovici, M. Breuer and A. Friedman, Digital System Testing and Testable Design. IEEE Press, 1994. 
2. NPTEL Course: VLSI Design Verification and Test. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106103016/  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
108 
 
 
Course Title Formal Verification Number EEL7XX0 
 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 
Offered for B.Tech., M. Tech., Ph.D. Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite High-level Synthesis, VLSI Design   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Enable students to learn the concepts of verification techniques used for VLSI integrated circuits.  
2. Provide exposure to the students about complexity of verification in the high -density VLSI chips in present 
scenario. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
Students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply principles of formal verification for digital designs in VLSI systems.  
2. Implement the programs for reasonably advanced logic circuits.  
 
Contents 
Introduction: Introduction to Digital VLSI Design flow; Needs and challenges of VLSI systems; Review of 
High-Level Synthesis; Basics of VLSI testing and verification, Flow of testing and verification. (4 Lectures)  
Verification: Introduction- Functional verification, Timing verification, Formal verification. (4 Lectures)  
Basics of equivalence checking and model checking, Hardware emulation. (2 Lectures)  
Various Techniques of Verification: Design verification using simulation, analytical and formal techniques. (3 
Lectures)  
Formal equivalence checking, Finite automata and tempora l logic,  Symbolic trajectory evaluation, term 
rewriting, Verifying clock domain crossings.  (5 Lectures) 
Testbenches: Analog/mixed-signal verification, Assertion Based Verification. (3 Lectures)  
System Verilog assertions, Verification testbenches, Use of verification algorithms. (4 Lectures) 
SoC and CPU verification challenges, New directions in verification. (3 Lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. M. Bushnell and V. D. Agrawal, Essentials of Electronic Testing for Digital, Memory and Mixed Signal VLSI 
Circuits. Springer, 2005. 
2. T. Kropf, Introduction to Formal Hardware Verification. Springer Verlag, 2000.  
3. N. H. E. Weste, D. Harris and A. Banerjee, CMOS VLSI Design: A Circuits and Systems Perspective.  Pearson, 
3rd edition, 2006. 
 
Preparatory course material 
1. Li.L.; Thornton,M., Digital System Verification: A Combined Formal Methods and Simulation Framework. Morgan 
& Claypool, 2010. 
2. McFarland,M.,C., “Formal Verification of Sequential Hardware: A Tutorial”, IEEE Tran. on Computer -Aided 
Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, vol. 12, no. 5 , May 1993. 
3. NPTEL Course: VLSI Design Verification and Test. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106103016/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
109 
 
Course Title Advanced VLSI Design and Lab Number EEL7XX0 
 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–2 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech, M. Tech., Ph.D. Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite Basic VLSI Design   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Enable students to learn the concepts of more advanced topics in VLSI Design to have an  overview of VLSI 
subsystems. 
2. Provide exposure to the students about system level issues and trade -offs in chip designs. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
Students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Design digital circuits for high-speed, low-power applications. 
2. Implement VLSI subsystem designs using memory and arithmetic units.  
 
Contents: 
Introduction: Economics of VLSI systems, Review of CMOS logic circuits; impact of fabrication issues on design, 
ASIC design flow: logic synthesis, placement and routing. (4 Lectures)  
High-speed Logic Circuits: High-speed switching circuits; Advanced clocking strategies and clock distribution; 
Logical effort, high -speed digital logic design using lo gical effort, performance optimization between speed 
and power. (6 Lectures) 
Low-Power Design Technique: Deep submicron design issues; Leakage components, estimation and leakage 
tolerant design techniques, Subthreshold, Gate, Junction tunneling, GIDL, Diod e leakage etc.; Scalability of 
leakage tolerant design techniques; Low -voltage designs including digital subthreshold operations, trade -off 
between high-speed and low-power designs. (6 Lectures) 
Arithmetic and Memory Architectures: Arithmetic building bloc ks for ALU; Adders, Multipliers, Shifter, Barrel 
Shifter; Introduction to Memories; High performance memory and array structures. (6 Lectures)  
Interconnect-aware Designs: Impact of scaling and interconnects, signal integrity, buffer insertion and inductiv e 
peaking, Low swing and Current mode signaling, Capacitively coupled interconnects. (6 Lectures)  
 
Lab experiments: It will include designing and optimization of high -speed circuits using logical effort, Low -
power circuits in subthreshold conduction, Memor y architectures such as 6T SRAM cell, etc., fast adders and 
multipliers, interconnect aware designs.  
 
Text Books 
1. K. Roy and S. Prasad, Low Voltage, Low Power VLSI Subsystems.McGraw Hill Education, 1st edition, 2017. 
2. I. Sutherland, R. F. Sproull and D. Harris, Logical Effort: Designing Fast CMOS Circuits. Morgan Kaufmann, 
1st edition, 1999. 
3. J. Rabaey, A. Chandrakasan and B. Nikolic, Digital Integrated Circuits: A Design Perspective , Prentice Hall, 
2nd edition, 2009. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
Chandorkar,A.N. et al., Advanced VLSI Design, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay,      
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117101004/ 
 
Preparatory course material 
Y. Taur and T. Ning, Fundamentals of Modern VLSI Devices. Cambridge University Press, 2 nd edition, 2016. 
 
 
 
 
110 
 
Title VLSI Broadband Communication Circuits Number EEL7XXX 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech., M.Tech. , Ph.D.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite Analog circuits, Basics of transmission lines, 
fundamentals of continuous time and discrete time 
signals and systems 
  
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide the basic understanding of signal degradation linked to broadband circuits.  
2. Develop the ability to design and implement the integrated circuits for broadband communication.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Design broadband amplifiers, equalizers, data recovery circuits. 
 
Contents  
Digital signal transmission: Introduction to broadband digital communication, Channel characteristics -
intersymbol interference, eye diagrams [3 lectures] 
Digital communication over wired links, Mesochronous and Plesiochronous links [3 lectures]  
 
Synchronization: Phase detectors for periodic signals and random data: Type I PLL [4 lectures]  
Type II PLL [3 lectures] 
 
Clock and data recovery circuits: Analog and digital implementations of CDRs [4 lectures], 
Design implementation of PLL [3 lectures] 
 
SerDes: Drivers and receivers for low frequencies [3lectures] 
Serializer and Deserializer architectures and circuits [5 Lectures]  
 
Equalization: Need of Linear and non-linear equalizers; LMS adaptation [2 lectures] 
Equalizer design and related issues including noise and crosstalk [5 lectures]  
 
Design challenges: Integrated circuit implementation issues of broadband amplifiers for transmission and 
reception [4 lectures] 
Feedforward and decision feedback equalization [3 lectures] 
 
Textbooks 
1. Y. Tsividis, (2012),Mixed Analog Digital VLSI Devices and Technology (An introduction), World   Scientific, 
New Jersey 
2. K. R. Laker and W.M.C. Sansen, (1994), Design of Analog Integrated  Circuits and Systems, McGraw-Hill 
3. BehzadRazavi, (1996), Monolithic Phase Locked Loops and Clock Recovery Circuits-Theory and Design, John 
Wiley & Sons,  
 
Preparatory course material 
1. BehzadRazavi, (2015), Design of Integrated Circuits for Optical Communications,John Wiley & Sons. 
2. David Johns and Ken Martin, (2013), Analog Integrated Circuit Design, John Wiley & Sons.  
 
  
111 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Artificial Intelligence of Things (AIoT) Specialization 
 
  
112 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Visual Computing Specialization 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
113 
 
Title Image Synthesis Number EE/CSE 7XXX 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Specialization Elective 
Prerequisite Computer Graphics, Digital Image Processing 
& Probability, Statistics, and Stochastic 
Processes 
  
Objectives  
The Instructor will introduce students to fundamentals of realistic image synthesis.   
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to synthesize realistic looking images for animations, simulation, 
gaming, etc. 
 
Contents  
The Goals of Rendering, Ray Tracing I: Basic Algorithm, Ray-Surface Intersection [4 Lectures]  
Ray Tracing II: Acceleration Techniques [4 Lectures] 
 
The Light Field, Lights and Lighting, Illumination, Camera and Film [4 Lectures] 
Sampling and Reconstruction, Aliasing and Antialiasing, Statistical Sampling [4 Lectures]  
 
Reflection Models: BRDFs, Ideal Specular and Diffuse [2 Lectures]   
Reflection Models II: Glossy, Texture, the Rendering Equation [4 Lectures]  
Materials and BRDFs, Mapping techniques, Exotic materials [4 Lectures] 
 
Monte Carlo Methods: Probability, Sampling and Variance Reduction [3 Lectures]  
Sampling Paths, Irradiance Caching and Photon Maps [5 Lectures] 
Radiosity: Form Factors, Solvers [4 Lectures]  
Meshing and Hierarchical Techniques [4 Lectures] 
 
Textbooks 
1. Akenine-Möller, T., Haines, E., & Hoffman, N. (2019). Real-time rendering. Crc Press. 
2. Hughes, J. F., Van Dam, A., Foley, J. D., McGuire, M., Feiner, S. K., & Sklar, D. F. (2014). Computer graphics: 
principles and practice. Pearson Education.  
3. Cohen, M. F., & Wallace, J. R. (2012). Radiosity and realistic image synthesis. Elsevier.  
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Prof. Pat Hanrahan, Computer Graphics: Image Synthesis Techniques, Stanford University: 
https://graphics.stanford.edu/courses/cs348b-00/ 
2. Prof. Ravi Raviramamoorthi, Computer Graphics, University of California, San Diego,  
https://www.youtube.com/user/raviramamoorthi/videos   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
114 
 
Title Animation Number EE/CSE 7XXX 
Department Electrical Engineering, CSE L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Specialization Elective 
Prerequisite Computer Graphics   
Objectives  
The Instructor will introduce students to fundamentals of animation and simulation.   
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to use the animation techniques for physics based real time 
systems.  
 
Contents  
Core mathematics and methods for computer animation and motion simulation. [3 Lectures]  
Traditional animation techniques. [3 Lectures] 
 
Physics-based simulation methods for modeling shape and motion:  
Particle systems, constraints, rigid bodies, [4 Lectures] 
Deformable models, collisions and contact [4 Lectures] 
Fluids, and fracture. [4 Lectures]  
Animating natural phenomena. [4 Lectures] 
 
Methods for animating virtual characters and crowds [4 Lectures]  
Data-driven animation methods, realism and perception [4 Lectures] 
Animation systems, motion control [4 Lectures] 
Real-time and interactive methods [3 Lectures] 
Multi-sensory feedback. [3 Lectures] 
 
Textbooks 
1. Hughes, J. F., Van Dam, A., Foley, J. D., McGuire, M., Feiner, S. K., & Sklar, D. F. (2014). Computer graphics: 
principles and practice. Pearson Education. 
2. Parent, R. (2012). Computer animation: algorithms and techniques. Newnes. 
3. Marschner, S., & Shirley, P. (2015). Fundamentals of computer graphics. CRC Press.  
 
Self Learning Material 
Prof. Doug James, Computer Graphics: Animation and Simulation, Stanford University, 
https://graphics.stanford.edu/courses/cs348b-00/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
115 
 
Title Computational Photography Number EE/CSE 7XXX 
Department EE, CSE L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Specialization Elective 
Prerequisite Basics of Image Processing   
Objectives  
The Instructor will introduce students to the computational photography fundamentals.   
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to design efficient algorithms for problems such as motion 
deblurring, compositing, warping and use computational cameras for intelligent sensing.  
 
Contents  
Modern optics and lenses;Radiometry and Photometry [3 lectures] 
Camera models, aperture, shutter and energy calculations motion and defocus blur [2 Lectures]  
Epsilon Photography, Single-shot Multi-domain Camera.  [4 Lectures] 
Computational Illumination: dual photography, relighting [4 Lectures] 
Retrographic Sensing for the Measurement of Surface Texture and Shape. [5 Lectures]  
Lightfields, Cameras for human-computer interaction, [3 Lectures] 
Wavelengths and colors, Hyperspectral Imaging Techniques [3 Lectures]  
Thermal cameras, high-speed [2 Lectures] 
3D range-sensing cameras and camera arrays. [4 Lectures] 
Removing camera shake and motion blur, Coded Aperture [4 Lectures]  
Color manipulation, Image compositing [3 Lectures] 
Panoramas, Warping and morphing, Motion Magnification.  [5 Lectures]  
 
Textbooks 
1. Computer Vision: Algorithms and Applications, by Richard Szeliski. 
2. Multiple View Geometry in Computer Vision, by Richard Hartley and Andrew Zisserman.  
3. Reinhard, E., Heidrich, W., Debevec, P., Pattanaik, S., Ward, G., & Myszkowski, K. (2010). High  dynamic 
range imaging: acquisition, display, and image-based lighting. Morgan Kaufmann. 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Prof. Ramesh Raskar, Computational Camera and Photography, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/media-arts-and-sciences/mas-531-computational-camera-and-photography-
fall-2009/index.htm 
2. Prof.Ioannis (Yannis) Gkioulekas, Computational Photography, Carnegie Mellon University: 
http://graphics.cs.cmu.edu/courses/15-463/  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
116 
 
Title Visual Perception Number EEL7XXX 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Specialization Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will introduce students to the fundamentals for Visual Perception.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability of applying visual perception concepts to advance technologies 
of AR/VR, rendering, visualization, and and human computer interaction.  
 
Contents  
Introduction: Optical Information, Visual System [3 Lectures] 
Perceiving Objects and Color [3 Lectures]  
Visual System: Spatial Vision Perceiving Objects, Color[4 Lectures] 
Depth and Movements [4 Lectures]  
Spatial Vision:  Perceiving Depth and Size, Perceiving Movement [5 Lectures]  
Perceiving Scenes [3 Lectures]  
Perception Functions and Categories [5 Lectures]  
Visual Attention [5 Lectures]  
Visual Memory [2 Lectures]  
Applications  in Image Synthesis, AR/VR [4 Lectures] 
Rendering, and Visualization [4 Lectures]   
 
Textbooks 
1. Goldstein, E. Bruce, and James Brockmole (2016). Sensation and perception. Cengage Learning.  
2. Gordon, Ian E. Theories of visual perception (2004). Psychology press.  
3. DeValois, Russell L., and Karen K. DeValois (1990). Spatial vision. Oxford university press.  
4. Davies, E. R. (2004). Machine vision: theory, algorithms, practicalities. Elsevier.  
 
Self Learning Material 
Prof. Aditi Majumder, Visual Perception, University of California, Irvine, 
https://www.ics.uci.edu/~majumder/vispercep/vispercep.htm 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
117 
 
Title Image and Video Forensics Number EE7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Specialization Elective 
Prerequisite Digital Image Processing & Probability, 
Statistics, and Stochastic Processes 
  
Objectives  
The Instructor will : 
1. Introduce the framework of Image and Video Forensics. 
2. Discuss the various techniques for forgery detection in Images and Videos.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to:   
Design an appropriate method for forgery detection based on available information.  
 
 
Contents   
Image and Video Forgeries [3 Lectures]: Image formation, Types of Image and Video Forgery, Splicing, Copy-
Move, Retouching, Deep Fakes. 
Camera Finger-printing [7 Lectures]: 
 Camera Response Function, Noise [3 Lectures] 
Camera Signature,Camera Parameters based detection. [4 Lectures] 
Coding based Techniques [7 Lectures]:  
Image and Video Coding, Coding Priors, Compression Signatures [4 Lectures]  
Frame based analysis (insertion, deletion, replication, shuffling), Audio Analysis. [3 Lectures] 
Scene/Feature based Techniques [17 Lectures]:  
Gradients, Motion, Motion Blur, Defocus Blur, Depth, Noise [5 Lectures] 
Graph Matching, Illumination,  Shadow, scene-Audio correlation [4 Lectures] 
Various Priors (Color, Gradients, Natural Image) [4 Lectures] 
Transform domain features.[4 Lectures] 
Deep Fakes [7 Lectures]:  
Counter Forensics, Adversarial Network, Deep Fakes [4 Lectures] 
Motion-Audio Synchronization, Cloud based detection framework. [3 Lectures] 
 
Textbook  
1. Farid, H. (2016). Photo forensics. MIT Press.  
2. Sencar, H. T., &Memon, N. (2013). Digital image forensics. Counter-forensics: attacking image forensics, 327-
366. 
 
Self Learning Material 
Prof. Rita Singh, Computational Forensics and Investigative Intelligence, Carnegie Mellon University, 
http://forensics.cs.cmu.edu/courses/spring2018/schedule.html  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
118 
 
Title 3D Shape Analysis Number EE7XXX 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Specialization 
Elective 
Prerequisite Fourier Analysis, Linear Algebra   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide students an understanding of differential geometry tools isometry, geodesics, Laplace Beltrami 
Operator, and Functional Maps.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. apply the learned geometry tools to solve practical 3D surface reconstruction problem.  
2. generate 3D printable models from the unstructured point clouds. 
 
Contents  
Introduction to Differential Geometry [5 Lectures]: Basics of differential geometry of curve and surfaces and 
estimating the quantities such as normal and curvature.   
Surface Representation and Reconstruction [9 Lectures]: 3D Surface Representation, Param etric and Non-
parametric, Implicit, Signed Distance Function [3 Lectures] 
Data structures for surface representation [1 Lectures] 
3D surface reconstruction from point clouds. [5 Lectures] 
Shape Analysis Tools [12 Lectures]:   
Isometry, geodesics on triangle meshes [4 Lectures] 
Scalar functions on shapes, discrete Laplace Beltrami operator [5 Lectures] 
Heat Diffusion on Shapes [3 Lectures] 
Shape Matching [12 Lectures]:  
3D Shape Descriptors, Rigid and Non-rigid registration [5 Lectures] 
Functional Maps, 3D Shape correspondences [5 Lectures] 
Intrinsic Symmetry [2 Lectures] 
Shape Repairing [4 Lectures]: Shape completion, generating printable 3D models from raw point clouds  
 
Textbooks  
1. Botsch, M., Kobbelt, L., Pauly, M., Alliez, P., &Lévy, B. (2010). Polygon mesh processing. CRC press. 
2. Solomon, J. (2015). Numerical algorithms: methods for computer vision, machine learning, and graphics. 
CRC press. 
3. O'neill, B. (2006). Elementary differential geometry. Elsevier. 
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Prof. Justin Solomon, Shape Analysis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
http://groups.csail.mit.edu/gdpgroup/6838_spring_2019.html 
2. Prof. Siddhartha Chaudhuri, Digital Geometry Processing, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay: 
https://www.cse.iitb.ac.in/~cs749/spr2017/ 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. Prof. Gilbert Strang,Linear  Algebra and Learning from Data, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
https://math.mit.edu/~gs/learningfromdata/ 
 
  
119 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Socio-Digital Reality 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
120 
 
Title Multimodal Interface Number EE7XXX 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 0–0–4 [2] 
Offered for  Type Specialization Core 
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will introduce students to the multimodal signals and interfaces.   
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to design multimodal interface applications. 
 
Contents  
Introduction to principles of Multimodal Interfaces (2) 
Basic haptic rendering and perception experiments using haptic interfaces (3)  
AR and VR models (3) 
EEG (1) 
Eye Tracker (1) 
Gesture (Kinect) (2) 
Audio Assistance (2) 
 
Textbooks 
1. A. Bhardwaj and S. Chaudhuri, “Kinesthetic Perception: A Machine Learning Approach”, Springer 
Publishers, 2017. 
2. MC Lin and MA Otaduy (Eds), “Haptic Rendering: Foundations, Algorithms, and Applications”, AK Peters, 
Ltd; London: 2008. 
3. Aukstakalnis, Steve. Practical augmented reality: A guide to the technologies, applications, and human 
factors for AR and VR. Addison-Wesley Professional, 2016. 
 
Self Learning Material  
 
1. Prof. Gordon Wetzstein, Virtual Reality, Stanford University, https://stanford.edu/class/ee267/ 
2. Prof. Allison Okamura, Design and Control of Haptic Systems, Stanford University, 
http://web.stanford.edu/class/me327/ 
 
  
121 
 
Title Speech Understanding Number EE7XXX 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Specialization Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will introduce students to basic concepts and techniques that help constitute speech 
understanding 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to design systems that can process speech signals with the goal 
of extracting useful semantic signal information. 
Contents  
Automatic Speech Recognition: HMMs for Acoustic Modeling [3 Lectures]  
HMMs and Weighted Finite-State Transducers  (WFSTs), WFSTs for Speech Understanding and  Recognition,  
Basics of speech production, Tied-state HMMs [5 Lectures ] 
Feature analysis for Speech Understanding [2 Lectures] 
Viterbi decoding algorithm and the Baum-Welch training algorithm [3 Lectures] 
Gaussian Mixture Models (GMMs), context-dependent triphones for acoustic modelling [5 lectures] 
Introduction to NN-based Acoustic Modeling, RNN-based models [4 Lectures] 
Natural Language Processing: Word structure, semantics (lexical semantics, WordNet and WordNet based 
similarity measures) [5 lectures] 
Classical parsing, parsing using Probabilistic Context Free Grammars and EM based approaches [5 lectures]  
Language Modelling (basic ideas, smoothing techniques), RNN-based language models [4 lectures] 
Distributional word representation, Supervised sentiment analysis [3 lectures]  
Natural language inference [3 lectures] 
 
Textbooks: 
1. Gales, M., & Young, S. (2008). The application of hidden Markov models in speech recognition. Foundations 
and Trends® in Signal Processing, 1(3), 195-304. 
2. Daniel Jurafsky and James H. Martin (2009). Speec h and Language Processing: An Introduction to Natural 
Language Processing, Speech Recognition, and Computational Linguistics. 2nd edition. Prentice -Hall. 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Prof. Bill MacCartney, Natural language understanding, Stanford 
University,https://web.stanford.edu/class/cs224u/ 
2. Prof. Preethi Jyothi, Automatic Speech Recognition, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, 
https://www.cse.iitb.ac.in/~pjyothi/cs753/index.html 
 