Source: http://intra.iitj.ac.in/acad_website/intra/7.%20B.Tech%20MT_09102020.pdf
================================================================================

Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2nd year B.Tech. Materials Engineering 
Curriculum Structure 
AY 2020-21 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2nd year B.Tech. Materials Engineering 
Curriculum Structure 
AY 2020-21 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
1. Introduction 
Addressing continuously evolving demands for materials in the emerging areas such as, energy, aerospace, 
defence, healthcare, transport, etc. requires engineers with thorough understanding and knowledge of the 
materials.  To cater to this requirement, the Department of Metallurgical and Materials Engineering at IIT Jodhpur 
envisions to impart high -quality education in the areas of Materials Engineering. The B.Tech. program in 
Materials Engineering offers a broad -based academic curriculum designed to attract  highly motivated students 
interested in the emerging area of Materials and the program is committed to impart high -quality education in 
designing, processing and development, characterization and evaluation of advanced materials, and process 
metallurgy, so that the students can contribute to the Materials innovation.  
 
The B.Tech. program in Materials Engineering educates and trains students to understand the scientific principles 
that govern the relationships among extraction, processing, structure, prope rties, and performance of materials. 
The undergraduate Materials Engineering curriculum encompasses four major streams: 
1. Structural materials 
2. Functional materials 
3. Computational materials engineering 
4. Process metallurgy.  
 
The proposed UG curriculum consists of foundational courses, and core and electives from all four major streams. 
The foundational courses form the base of the program and enables the student to take program core and program 
elective courses from the four major streams. With such a broad curr iculum with sufficient subject depth for an 
undergraduate program, the B.Tech. program aims to provide students with a solid academic foundation to 
address the needs in materials area and encourages them to pursue research in the new and emerging areas. In  
the curriculum, an emphasis is given to the emerging areas in materials engineering such as computational 
materials engineering, energy materials, and advanced structural materials. Additionally, to enable the students 
to pursue their interest in one of t he four major streams, the program structure allows students to specialize in 
one of the above mentioned streams of Materials Engineering. The students can obtain a Departmental 
Specialization after completing additional 20 credits beyond the regular B.Tec h. program requirement. This 
ensures depth along with sufficient breadth in the curriculum. This curriculum is expected to equip the students 
with relevant experimental and computational skillsets relevant to the industry and will enable the graduates to 
innovate and address present day materials challenges to meet the future needs of the country.  
 
2. Objective of the program 
1. To impart education on the core concepts in Materials Engineering along with providing sufficient breadth 
of knowledge in the traditional as well as emerging areas of materials engineering 
2. To train students on experimental techniques for studying materials engineering  
3. To provide students sufficient analytical and computational skills to address materials engineering needs  
4. To introduce an early sense of attitude towards technology development and its lifecycle  
5. To inculcate an attitude towards the commitment to engineering ethics, continued learning, and professional 
development 
6. To enable students to optionally specialise in one of the four areas of  focus: 
a. Structural materials 
b. Functional materials 
c. Computational materials engineering 
d. Process metallurgy. 
 
3. Expected Graduate Attribute 
 
1. Overall understanding of atomic structure, crystal structure and imperfections in materials  
2. Ability to understand the physical and chemical phenomena or process through thermodynamic and kinetic 
principles 
3. Ability to understand the relation between electronic band structure and electrical, optical and magnetic 
properties of materials 
2 
 
4. Broad knowledge on processing of materials and fabrication components following various processing and 
manufacturing techniques, and basic skills to characterize the microstructure  
5. Ability to correlate processing-structure-property-performance of materials and their processing 
6. Knowledge about the process of extraction of ferrous and non-ferrous metals from ore  
7. Ability to use various simulation tools to design materials and predict material behaviour for a better 
understanding of materials 
8. Ability to design and execute technical projects 
9. Skills to communicate engineering concepts and ideas to peers 
10. Appreciation and adherence to professional ethics 
 
4. Learning Outcome 
 
1. Ability to apply principles of thermodynamics and kinetics to understand, design and process advanced 
materials 
2. Ability to use computational and analytical modelling techniques to predict various properties of materials  
3. Ability to use materials testing and characterization techniques to validate structure -property-performance 
correlation in materials at various length scales 
4. Understanding of electronic structure of materials and ability to correlate electronic structure with transport 
properties of materials 
5. Knowledge of processing parameters for the extraction of ferrous and non -ferrous metals, and knowledge to 
comprehend the process cycle to convert raw material to a final product  
6. Ability to understand materials processing and process scale up 
 
5. Topic clouds 
 
The major topics from the individual courses are presented here in the form of a topic cloud.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Computational 
Materials Engineering  
 
Modelling, Boundary value problem, 
Diffusion type problem, Wave 
Propagation Problem, Finite Difference, 
Computation, Molecular dynamics, 
Atomistic simulations, Calculation of 
Phase diagram, Thermodynamic 
Database, Solidification simulation, Alloy 
Design, Modelling, Machine learning, 
Feature identification, Informatics, Finite 
Element Analysis, Stiffness Matrix, 
Galerkin method, Displacement 
 
Structural Materials 
Defects in Solids, Plastic Deformation, 
Strengthening Mechanisms, Mechanical 
Properties, Failure of Materials, Steels, 
Processing, Physical Metallurgy, 
Microstructure, Properties, Corrosion, 
Oxidation, Polymers, Processing, Rheology, 
Composites, Fibre -Matrix interface, 
laminae and laminates, Ceramics, 
Refractories, Glasses, Sintering, Coatings, 
Abrasives, 3D printing, Materials for 3D 
Printing Process, Additive manufacturing, 
Casting techniques, gating design, casting 
defects, Fusion welding, Solid state 
welding, Microstructu re and Properties of 
weld zone 
Functional Materials  
Band structure, Density of States, 
Semiconductors, Dopants, metal -oxides, 
organics, electronic devices, 
semiconductor processing, Battery 
Materials, Fuel cells, Hydrogen Storage, 
Solar cells, Supercapacitors, 
Thermoelectrics, Carbon ba sed materials, 
Shape memory alloys, smart materials, 
functionally graded materials, self -healing 
materials, bio -medical sensing, 
electrostrictive and magnetostrictive 
materials, smart textiles, Nanomaterials, 
Biomaterials, Tissue materials, Implants, 
Coatings, Thin films, Deposition, 
Processing, functional Properties 
Process Metallurgy  
Transport processes, Metal -Slag 
interaction, Continuous Casting, 
Hydrometallurgy, Pyrometallurgy , 
Electrometallurgy, Metal extraction, 
Refining, Mineral processing, 
comminution and screening, separation, 
concentration, Chemical Kinetics, 
Chemical control, Diffusion control, Rate 
controlling step, Ladle metallurgy, 
Degassing, Ingot defects, Process 
phenomena, Metal -slag interaction, 
Energy and Mass Balance, Process control, 
Leaching, Phase stability diagram, Metal 
recovery processes, Metal utilization, 
Electrochemistry, Electrodeposition, 
 
 
Foundational and 
Core topics 
 
Physics, Chemistry, Mathematics, Biology, 
Signals and systems, Machine learning, 
Numerical Methods, Differential Equations, 
Computation, Data structure, algorithm, 
Thermodynamics, Mechanics, Structure of 
Materials, Physical Metallurgy, Polymers, 
Corrosion, Material s Selection, Phase 
Diagram, Functional Properties, Diffusion, 
Mass Transfer, Heat Transfer, Fluid Flow, 
Nucleation and Growth, Solidification, 
Diffraction, Microscopy, Spectroscopy, 
 
3 
 
6. Unique skillsets targeted 
Computational approaches, which will enable 
a. Designing of materials and components for engineering applications  
b. Prediction of properties of materials 
c. Designing of industrial processes 
 
Experimental techniques for 
a. Materials testing and characterization 
b. Performance evaluation and enhancement 
 
7. Mapping of Topic clouds with proposed courses 
Table 1. Mapping of topic clouds with proposed courses   
Area Topics Category (Core/ 
Elective) 
Course 
Foundations 
of Materials 
Engineering 
Numerical Methods, Differential 
Equations, Computation 
Institute Engineering 
Core (IE) 
Scientific Computation 
Reversible and irreversible process, Laws 
of thermodynamics, Intensive and 
Extensive properties, State variable and 
Path variable 
Institute Engineering 
Core (IE) 
Thermodynamics 
Supervised learning, Unsupervised 
learning, Classification, Artificial neural 
network 
Institute Engineering 
Core (IE) 
Introduction to 
Machine Learning 
Deformation and Strain, Stress, Linear 
elasticity, Combined loading, Energy 
methods, Buckling 
Program Core (PC) Mechanics of Solids 
Condensed matter, Functional properties, 
Soft matter, Surfaces and Interfaces 
Institute Program 
linked Science core 
(LS) 
Introduction to 
Condensed Matter 
Physics 
Data structure, algorithm, searching and 
sorting, hashing 
Institute Engineering 
Core (IE) 
Data Structure and 
Algorithm 
Structure of Materials, Physical 
Metallurgy, Polymers, Corrosion, 
Materials Selection 
Institute Engineering 
Core (IE) 
Materials Science and 
Engineering 
Phase equilibria, Thermodynamics of 
Solutions, Phase diagram, Reaction 
Thermodynamics 
Program Core (PC) Materials at 
Equilibrium  
Nucleation and growth, Phase diagram, 
Thermodynamics and kinetics of Phase 
transformation, Diffusion, Solidification, 
Heat treatment 
Program Core (PC) Phase Transformations 
Characterization, Diffraction, Microscopy, 
Spectroscopy, Thermal Analysis 
Program Core (PC) Materials 
Characterization  
Casting, Solidification, Forming, Joining, 
Additive manufacturing 
Program Core (PC) Materials processing 
and Manufacturing 
Structural 
Materials 
Defects in solids, Plastic Deformation, 
Strengthening Mechanisms, Failure of 
Materials, Failure prevention 
Program Core (PC) Mechanical Behaviour 
of Materials 
Steels, Processing, Physical Metallurgy, 
Microstructure, Strengthening, Properties 
Program Elective (PE) Processing-
Microstructure and 
Properties of Steels 
4 
 
Electrochemistry, Corrosion, Forms of 
Corrosion, Corrosion induced failure, 
Oxidation, Corrosion Prevention 
Program Elective (PE) Degradation of 
Materials 
Structure of Polymers, Defects, 
Polymerization, Processing, Rheology, 
Characterization 
Program Elective (PE) Polymeric Materials 
and Processing 
Matrix, Reinforcements, Fibre-Matrix 
interface, Processing, laminae and 
laminates, Properties, Nanocomposites 
Program Elective (PE) Composites  
Oxide and non-oxide Ceramics, 
Refractories, Glasses, Sintering, Coatings, 
Abrasives 
Program Elective (PE) Ceramics and Glass 
3D printing, Materials for 3D Printing 
Process, Additive manufacturing, 
Materials processing 
Program Elective (PE) 3D Printing: Material 
Processing and 
Properties 
Casting techniques, solidification, Heat 
flow, fluid flow, gating design, casting 
defects 
Program Elective (PE) Casting and 
Solidification 
Joining, Fusion welding, Solid state 
welding, Microstructure of weld zone, 
Mechanical Properties of weld zone 
Program Elective (PE) Metallurgy of Joining 
Creep, Oxidation and Hot Corrosion, 
Super Alloys 
Program Elective (PE) High Temperature 
Materials 
Functional 
Materials 
Band structure, Density of States, 
Semiconductors, Dopants, metal-oxides, 
organics, carbon nanotubes, electronic 
devices 
Program Core (PC) Electronic Materials 
Battery Materials, Fuel cells, Hydrogen 
Storage, Solar cells, Supercapacitors, 
Thermoelectrics, Carbon based materials 
Program Core (PC) Materials for Energy 
Conversion and 
Storage 
Shape memory alloys, smart polymers, 
smart ceramics, functionally graded 
materials, self-healing materials, bio-
medical sensing, electrostrictive and 
magnetostrictive materials, smart 
composites, smart textiles 
Program Core (PC) Smart Materials (both 
structure property and 
electronic property of 
materials components) 
Semiconductors processing, Synthesis and 
processing of 2D Materials 
Program Elective (PE) Synthesis and 
Processing of 
Semiconductors and 
2D Materials 
Electrodes and Electrolytes, 
Electrochemical Cell, Primary and 
secondary batteries, Thermodynamics 
and Kinetics 
Program Elective (PE) Battery Materials 
Nanomaterials, Synthesis, Processing, 
Characterization, Properties of materials 
Program Elective (PE) Nanoscience (from 
Department of 
Chemistry) 
Biomaterials, Biocompatibility, 
Biodegradability, Tissue materials, 
Implants 
Program Elective (PE) Biomaterials 
Engineering (Jointly 
with BSBE) 
Coatings, Thin films, Deposition, 
Processing, Properties 
Program Elective (PE) Surface Engineering 
(PE) 
Computatio
nal 
Boundary value problem, Partial 
Differential Equation, Diffusion type 
problem, Finite Difference method, 
Program Core (PC) Computational 
Modelling of Materials  
5 
 
Materials 
Engineering 
Molecular dynamics, Atomistic 
simulations  
Thermodynamic parameters, Calculation 
of Phase diagram, Thermodynamic 
Database, Solidification simulation, Alloy 
Design 
Program Elective (PE) Computational 
Thermodynamics (PE) 
Total energy calculations, Electronic and 
Phonon Band Structure Calculations 
Program Elective (PE) First Principles 
Calculations 
Conserved and Non-Conserved Order 
Parameter, Phase Transitions, 
Microstructure Evolution 
Program Elective (PE) Phase Field Modelling 
Scientific Data, feature identification, 
Supervised learning, Materials Design, 
Model verification 
Program Elective (PE) Machine Learning for 
Materials Design (PE) 
Finite Element Analysis, Stiffness Matrix, 
Galerkin method, Displacement 
formulation, Stress analysis 
Program Elective (PE) Finite Element 
Methods and 
Applications (PE) 
Process 
Metallurgy 
Transport processes, Metal-Slag 
interaction, Ladle and tundish metallurgy, 
Continuous Casting 
Program Core (PC) Iron and Steel Making 
Hydrometallurgy, Pyrometallurgy, 
Electrometallurgy, Metal extraction, 
Refining 
Program Core (PC) Extraction of 
Nonferrous Metals 
Mineral processing, comminution and 
screening, separation, concentration 
Program Elective (PE) Mineral Beneficiation 
Chemical Kinetics, Transport processes, 
Chemical control, Diffusion control, Rate 
controlling step 
Program Elective (PE) Kinetics of 
Metallurgical 
Processes 
Degassing, Ladle metallurgy, Ingot 
defects, Continuous casting 
Program Elective (PE) Secondary and Special 
Steelmaking 
Process phenomena, Metal-slag 
interaction, Energy and Mass Balance, 
Process control 
Program Elective (PE) Process Metallurgy 
Principles 
Leaching, Phase stability diagram, Metal 
recovery processes, Metal utilization 
Program Elective (PE) Hydrometallurgy 
Electrochemistry, Electrodeposition, 
Electrowinning 
Program Elective (PE) Electrometallurgy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
8. Course categories and credit distribution in the proposed B.Tech. programs 
Table 2. Course categories and credit distribution in the proposed B.Tech. programmes  
 
S.
N.  
Course Type Course Category  Regular B.Tech. Double B.Tech.  
 
Credit  Total Credit  Total 
1 Institute Core (I) 
 
Engineering (IE) 34 69 34 59 
Science (IS) 16 16 
Humanities (IH) 12 9 
2 Programme Linked (L) Science (LS) 7 0 
3 Programme Core (P) Programme Compulsory (PC) 50  71 50 71 
Programme Electives (PE) 18 18 
B.Tech. Project (PP) 3 3 
4 Open (O) Open Electives (OE) 10 10 0 0 
5 Engineering Science (E) Engineering Science Core 0 0 22 22 
Engineering Science Elective (EE) 0 0 8 8 
Total Graded 150  160 
6 Non-Graded (N) Humanities (NH) 6 15 6 15 
Engineering (NE) 3 3 
Design/Practical Experience (ND)  6 6 
Total Graded + Non-Graded   165  175 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
9. Credit Structure of B.Tech. Programmes 
Table 3. Credit Structure for B.Tech. Programmes 
Type L-T-P Distribution of contact and beyond contact hours Total Credits  
(TC=TH/3) Contact Hours 
(CH) 
Beyond Contact 
Hours (BCH) 
Total Hours 
(TH) 
1 hour of Lecture 1-0-0 1 hr 2 hr 3 hr 1 
1 hour of Tutorial 0-1-0 1 hr 2 hr 3hr 1  
1 hour of Lab/Project 0-0-1 1 hr 0.5 hr 1.5 hr 0.5 
#Contact hour for project refers to the involvement of students in the laboratory, discussion, etc.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
10. List of Programme Compulsory Courses  
Table 4. Programme Compulsory Courses for Materials Engineering  
Sr. No Course Name LTP Contact 
Hours 
Credit 
1 Mechanics of Solids 3-1-0 4 4 
2 Data Structure and Algorithms 3-0-2 5 4 
3 Materials at Equilibrium 3-1-0 4 4 
4 Electronic Materials 3-0-0 3 3 
5 Mechanical Behaviour of Materials 3-0-0 3 3 
6 Phase Transformations 3-0-0 3 3 
7 Iron and Steel Making 3-0-0 3 3 
8 Materials Characterization 3-0-0 3 3 
9 Computational Modelling of Materials 3-0-0 3 3 
10 Materials Processing and Manufacturing 3-0-0 3 3 
11 Materials for Energy Conversion and Storage 3-0-0 3 3 
12 Extraction of Nonferrous Metals 3-0-0 3 3 
13 Smart Materials 3-0-0 3 3 
14 Electronic Materials Lab 0-0-3 3 1.5 
15 Physical Metallurgy Lab 0-0-3 3 1.5 
16 Materials Characterization Lab 0-0-2  2 1 
17 Computational Modelling of Materials Lab 0-0-2 2 1 
18 Materials Processing and Manufacturing Lab 0-0-3 3 1.5 
19 Energy Materials Lab 0-0-3 3 1.5 
Total 50 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
11. Stream-wise Programme Elective Courses 
Table 6. Stream-wise Programme Electives Courses  
Stream SN Courses L-T_P Credit Course 
Level 
Structural 
Materials 
1 Processing-Microstructure and Properties of 
Steels 
3-0-0 3 400 
2 Degradation and Failure of Materials  3-0-0 3 400 
3 Composites 3-0-0 3 400 
4 Polymeric Materials and Processing 3-0-0 3 400 
5 Ceramics and Glass 3-0-2 4 400 
6 Casting and Solidification  3-0-0 3 600 
7 Metallurgy of Joining 3-0-0 3 600 
8 High Temperature Materials  3-0-0 3 700 
9 Digital Fabrication (Offered by ME) 3-0-0 3 300 
10 Smart Manufacturing (Offered by ME) 2-0-2 3 300 
11 Additive Manufacturing (Offered by ME) 3-0-0 3 600 
12 Computer Aided Design (Offered by ME) 3-0-2 4 400 
13 Design of Machine Elements (Offered by 
ME) 
3-0-2  4 300 
Functional 
Materials 
1 Battery Materials 3-0-0 3 400 
2 3D Printing: Material Processing and 
Properties 
3-0-0 3 400 
3 Lithium ion Batteries 2-0-2 3 400 
4 Surface Engineering 3-0-0 3 600 
5 Synthesis and Processing of Semiconductors 
and 2D materials 
3-0-0 3 400 
6 Functional Ceramics 3-0-0 3 400 
7 Magnetism and Magnetic Materials 3-0-0 3 400 
8 Nanoscience (Offered by Chemistry) 3-0-0 3 400 
9 Biomaterials Engineering 3-0-0 3 400 
10 Cell-Material Interaction (BSBE) 3-0-0 3 400 
11 Tissue Engineering (BSBE) 3-0-0 3 400 
12 Interfacial Engineering in Soft Matter (CHE) 3-0-0 3 400 
13 Quantum Mechanics (PHY) 3-0-0 3 600 
14 Advanced Condensed Matter Physics (PHY) 3-0-0 3 700 
15 Energy Harvesting Technologies (PHY) 3-0-0 3 700 
16 Physics of Solar Cells (PHY) 3-0-0 3 700 
Computational 
Materials 
Engineering 
1 Computational Thermodynamics 2-0-2 3 400 
2 Modelling of Metallurgical Processes 3-0-0 3 700 
2 Machine Learning for Materials Design 2-0-2 3 700 
4 First-Principles Calculations 3-0-2 4 700 
5 Phase field modelling 3-0-0 3 700 
6 Industry 4.0: Applications in Metallurgical 
and Materials Engineering 
2-0-0 2 700 
7 Introduction to Internet of Things (Offered 
by EE) 
1-0-0 1 700 
8 Finite Element Methods (Offered by ME) 3-0-0 3 600 
9 Artificial Intelligence (CSE) 3-0-0 3 300 
10 Deep Learning (CSE) 3-0-3 4.5 400 
10 
 
11 Optimization (Offered by MA) 3-0-0 3 400 
Process 
Metallurgy 
1 Mineral Beneficiation 3-0-0 3 400 
2 Kinetics of Metallurgical Processes 3-0-0 3 400 
3 Principles of Process Metallurgy 3-0-0 3 400 
4 Hydrometallurgy 3-0-0 3 400 
5 Electrometallurgy 3-0-0 3 400 
6 Secondary and Special Steelmaking 3-0-0 3 600 
7 Processing of Rare Earth and Radioactive 
Materials (CH) 
3-0-0 3 400 
 8 Computational Fluid Dynamics (Offered by 
CH) 
3-0-2 4 700 
Special Topics 1 Special Topics in Materials Engineering  3-0-0 3 400/600 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
12. Specialization to be proposed by the department 
The students can obtain a Departmental Specialization after completing additional 20 credits beyond the regular 
B.Tech. program credit requirement. From the 20 credits, 8 credits must be taken from core areas of that 
specialization and 12 credits should be  taken from the electives within that specialization. 4 elective credits (out 
of 12) may be taken as elective project, which will allow the student to pursue his/her B.Tech. project in the area 
of his/her specialization. Therefore, after proper planning, a  student opting for specialization may earn 7 (4 
specialization elective project + 3 regular B.Tech. project) credits for B.Tech. project. The specializations will 
enable the students to pursue their area of interest and will ensure depth in the curriculum . 
 
Table 7. Specializations List 
S. No. 
 
Name of Specializations 
 
Credit requirement 
Core Elective 
1 Structural Materials 8 credits 12 credits 
2 Functional Materials 8 credits 12 credits 
3 Computational Materials Engineering 8 credits 12 credits 
4 Process Metallurgy 8 credits 12 credits 
 
Table 8. Specialization concept notes 
1 
Structural Materials 
 
Structural materials encompass a wide variety of materials whose primary purpose is to support or 
transmit load. Structural materials are used in applications such as transportation (aircraft and 
automobiles), construction (buildings and roads), or in comp onents used for body protection (helmets 
and body armor), energy production (turbine blades), or other smaller structures such as those used in 
microelectronics. Structural materials can be metallic, ceramic, polymeric or a composite.  
The objective of offering this specialization to encourage students to pursue emerging area of Materials 
design, processing, and structure-property correlation for advanced materials for lightweight structures 
subjected to severe environments such as high temperature, wear , high stress and strain rates, etc. to 
name a few.  The advancement in the microstructural characterization has enabled investigation of 
materials properties at different length scales which played a key role in solving the sudden material 
failure issues in the industry domain.  Apart from structural investigation, structural materials stream 
provides knowledge of correlating these microstructural features with the mechanical, physical and 
electronic properties of the material. This can be achieved by thoro ugh understanding of different 
materials processing and manufacturing techniques at lab as well as industry scales.   
Therefore, the specialization will provide in-depth education required for designing advanced structural 
materials and processing condition s as per the demand of the respective industry to obtain the usable 
products in a cost-effective manner.  Detailed curriculum for this specialization will be proposed later.  
2 
Functional Materials 
Functional materials represent an ever-growing set of advanced materials, whose properties e.g. shape, 
electrical conductivity, mechanical properties, color etc. could be tuned by an external stimulus - 
thermal, electrical, mechanical, light etc. These materials are characterized by one or multiple native 
properties of their own, e.g. ferroelectricity, thermoelectricity, piezoelectricity, magnetism, energy 
storage functions, magneto and electrostrictive materials and could be found in all classes of materials - 
ceramics, metals, polymers and organic molecules. Practically all modern-day applications ranging from 
computers, memory devices, displays, advanced sensors and MEMS based devices to batteries and 
shape memory alloys are a result of the advances in the functional properties of materials.  
With the ever -increasing demand for higher performing, more energy efficient and device 
miniaturization the functional properties of materials remains the most active areas of research not just 
in Materials Science but also cross disciplinary. With the advent of 5G and demand for IoT and AI based 
12 
 
technologies and building towards a more sustainable world there is an ever -increasing demand for 
materials with hitherto unexplored novel functionalities.  
The specialization on “Functional Materials” is being designed to impart the students with different 
facets of the functional properties of materials and their real -world applications along with a strong 
emphasis on the basics of the underlying phenomena. The functional properties of materials are 
continuously evolving in a very dynamic world and hence demands a continuously evolving nature of 
the curricula. Owing to the importance of Functional Materials in today’s world we would like to 
introduce a specialization on Functional Materials in our B.Tech program. A detailed curriculum will be 
proposed later. 
3 
Computational Materials Engineering 
Computational Modeling approaches provide insights into Materials aspects at atomic, micro, macro 
length scales and aid in better understanding of Materials and processes. Developments in the 
hardware front are making the computing power more affordable and developments in the theoretical 
approaches are broadening the capabilities of Modelling approaches. As a result, computational 
modeling is playing a key role in Materials design and discovery. The Computational Materials 
Engineering (CME) approach combines all available modelling techniques for improving existing 
metallurgical processes or properties of a structural material or a functional material. In this respect, 
the CME forms a horizontal for different specializations of Materials Engineering.  
Traditional science-based modeling techniques such as first-principles calculations, molecular dynamics, 
phase field methods, finite element methods, finite difference methods, Calphad methods, etc. have 
evolved to give results within acceptable accuracy of the experimental results. Recent ly, Materials 
Scientists started using data analysis-based techniques in Materials design and discovery. The emerging 
data-based techniques have potential to accelerate the Material Discovery and improve the Materials 
Processing. 
The objective of the CME i s to combine the traditional science -based techniques with emerging data 
based techniques for improving Materials design and discovery. The CME concept is still in infancy and 
requires continuous efforts from all the stakeholders involved to bring it to th e state-of-the-art stage. In 
this direction, we would like to start a B.Tech. program in Materials Engineering with a specialization in 
CME. Detailed curriculum for this specialization will be proposed later.  
4 
Process Metallurgy 
Process metallurgy is a s pecialization concerned with extracting metals from their ores, and the 
development, production, and use of metallic materials. Process metallurgy practitioners design 
complex metallurgical reactors using principles of physics, thermodynamics, reaction kin etics, and 
transport phenomena. Designing of such metallurgical reactors also requires skills in high -temperature 
experimentation and computer simulation techniques. In the years to come, extraction of metal will be 
extremely difficult due to the decreasing ore grade and strict laws to regulate the environmental impact 
of metallurgical emissions. In fact, the future trend in extractive metallurgy is to recover metals, even in 
parts-per-million levels, from wastes such as used catalysts and more importantly the ever-increasing 
volume of electronic wastes. 
A process metallurgy expert acquires multifaceted skills and hence the careers of process metallurgists 
may not be restricted to steel, copper, or aluminum plants. In fact, they can also design materials 
processing operations such as casting, powder metallurgy, and heat treatment. Semiconductor and 
waste processing facilities could also provide job openings. Experts in a computer simulation with a 
sound knowledge of transport phenomena have job opportunities spanning across other engineering 
branches too. Detailed curriculum for this specialization will be proposed later.  
 
 
 
 
13 
 
13. Curriculum of B.Tech. Materials Engineering  
Table 9. Curriculum of B.Tech. in Materials Engineering  
Ca
t 
Course LTP C
H 
N
C 
GC Ca
t 
Course LTP C
H 
NC GC 
 I Semester   II Semester  
IE Engineering 
Mechanics 
2-1-0 3 - 3 IE Introduction to 
Electrical 
Engineering 
3-0-2 5 - 4 
IS Chemistry  3-0-0 3 - 3 IE Introduction to 
Computer Science 
3-0-2 5 - 4 
IS Physics  3-0-0 3 - 3 IE Introduction to 
Bioengineering 
3-0-2 5 - 4 
IS Chemistry Lab 0-0-2 2 - 1       
IS Physics Lab 0-0-2 2 - 1       
IS Mathematics I  3-1-0 4 - 4 IS Mathematics II 3-1-0 4 - 4 
IE Engineering 
Visualization 
0-0-2 2 - 1 IE Engineering 
Realization 
0-0-2 2 - 1 
NE Engineering Design 
I  
0-0-2 2 1 - NE Engineering Design 
II  
0-0-2 2 1 - 
N
H 
Communication 
Skill I  
0-0-2 2 1 - N
H 
Communication Skill 
II  
0-0-2 2 1 - 
N
H 
Social Connect and 
responsibilities I 
0-0-1 1 0.
5 
- N
H 
Social Connect and 
responsibilities II 
0-0-1 1 0.5 - 
N
H 
Performing Arts I 
/Sports I  
0-0-1 1 0.
5 
- N
H 
Performing Arts 
II/Sports II 
0-0-1 1 0.5 - 
Total 11-2-
12 
25 3 16 Total 12-1-
14 
27 3 17 
 III Semester  IV Semester 
LS Scientific 
Computations 
3-1-0 4 - 4 IE Materials Science & 
Engineering 
Fractal 1: Physical 
Metallurgy 
Fractal 2: Polymers 
Fractal 3: Corrosion 
3 ×  
1-0-0    
3 - 3 
IE Thermodynamics 3-1-0 4 - 4 PC Data Structure and 
Algorithm 
3-0-2 5  4 
PC Mechanics of Solids 3-1-0 4 - 4 PC Materials at 
Equilibrium 
3-1-0 4  4 
IE Introduction to 
Machine Learning 
3-0-2 5 - 4 PC Materials for Energy 
Conversion and 
Storage  
3-0-0 3  3 
LS Condensed Matter 
Physics 
3-0-0 3 - 3 IE Signals and Systems 3-1-0 4 - 4 
NE Intro. To Profession  0-0-2 2 1  IH Humanities I 3-0-0 3 - 3 
Total 15-3-
4 
22 1 19 Total 15-1-
4 
23 - 21 
 V Semester  VI Semester 
PC Electronic Materials  3-0-0 3  3 PC Computational 
Modelling of 
Materials 
3-0-0 3  3 
PC Mechanical 
Behavior of 
Materials 
3-0-0 3  3 PC Materials Processing 
and Manufacturing  
3-0-0 3  3 
14 
 
PC Phase 
Transformations 
3-0-0 3  3 PC Extraction of 
Nonferrous Metals 
3-0-0 3  3 
PC Materials 
Characterization 
3-0-0 3  3 PC Iron and Steel 
Making 
3-0-0 3  3 
PC Electronic Materials 
Lab  
0-0-3 3  1.5 PC Smart Materials 3-0-0 3  3 
PC Physical 
Metallurgy Lab 
0-0-3 3  1.5 PC Computational 
Modelling of 
Materials Lab 
0-0-2 2  1 
PC Energy Materials 
Lab 
0-0-3 3  1.5 PC Materials Processing 
and Manufacturing 
Lab  
0-0-3 3  1.5 
PC Materials 
Characterization 
Lab 
0-0-2 2  1       
IH Humanities II 3-0-0 3 - 3 PE Programme/Open 
Elective 
3-0-0 3  3 
N
H 
Professional Ethics 
I 
0-1-0  1 - N
H 
Professional Ethics II 0-1-0  1 - 
Total 15-1-
11 
26 1 20.5 Total 18-1-
5 
24 1 20.
5 
 VII Semester  VIII Semester 
PP B. Tech. Project  0-0-6 6 - 3 IH Humanities IV 3-0-0 3 - 3 
PE
/ 
OE 
Programme/Open 
Electives 
10-0-
0 
10 - 10 PE
/ 
OE 
Programme/Open 
Electives 
15-0-
0 
15 - 15 
IH Humanities III 3-0-0 3 - 3       
IS Environmental 
Science 
2-0-0 2 - 2       
Total 15-0-
6 
21 - 18 Total 18-0-
0 
18 - 18 
Total of graded and Non-Graded Credit  9 150 
Non-Graded Design Credits 6 - 
Grand Total  15 165 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
14. Detailed Course Content 
Program Compulsory Courses 
 
Course Title Materials at Equilibrium 
 
Number MTL2XX0 
Department  Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L–T–P [C] 3–1–0 [4] 
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type Program Compulsory (PC) 
Pre-requisite  
Objectives 
1. Provide a basis for describing and understanding the stability of various forms of matter.  
2. Provide a basis for predicting the properties of an equilibrated system as a function of its content and 
characteristics. 
  
Learning Outcomes 
3. Establish the conditions for stability of a material and derive its properties.  
4. Control the evolution of microstructures with respect to different parameters. 
  
Course Content 
Phase equilibria [8 lectures]: Criteria for equilibrium, Maxwell relations, One component system, variation of 
free energy with temperature and pressure, equilibrium between condensed phases (solid -liquid, solid-solid), 
equilibrium between a vapor phase and a condensed phase 
 
Behavior of gases and liquids [6 lectures]: Ideal and non-ideal gases, activity, fugacity, Partial molar quantities, 
Raoult’s law and Henry’s law 
 
Solution thermodynamics [8 lectures]: Gibbs Duhem equation, Gibbs free energy of formation of a solution 
(ideal, non-ideal), configurational entropy, Regular solution model, statistical model of solutions  
 
Gibbs Free Energy Composition and Phase Diagrams (binary) [8 lectures]: Gibbs free energy and thermodynamic 
activity, standard state, criterion for phase stability, Gibbs free energy composition diagrams, activity -
composition diagrams, Application of regular solution model to phase diagrams  
 
Reactions involving gases [6 lectures]: Reaction equilibrium a gas mixture and the equilibrium constant, effect of 
pressure and temperature on the equilibrium constant 
 
Reactions involving a condensed phase and a gas phase [6 lectures]: Standard Gibbs free energy variation with 
temperature, Ellingham diagrams, effect of phase transformations 
 
Text Books 
Gaskell, D.R. and Laughlin, D.E., (2018), Introduction to Thermodynamics of Materials, 6th Edition CRC Press  
 
References 
1. Hillert, M., (2008), Phase Equilibria, Phase Diagrams and Phase Transformations Their Thermodynamic Basis, 
Second edition, Cambridge University Press  
2. Dehoff, R., (2006), Thermodynamics in Materials Science, 2nd Edition, CRC Press 
 
Online Course Material  
Ceder, G., and Anton Van der Ven, A., 3.20 Materials at Equilibrium (SMA 5111). Fall 2003. Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology: MIT OpenCourseWare, https://ocw.mit.edu. License: Creative Commons BY-NC-
SA. 
 
 
 
16 
 
Title Electronic Materials Number MTL3XX0 
Department Metallurgical & Materials Engineering L-T-P 
[C] 
3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type Program Compulsory (PC) 
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Introduce and discuss about different electronic materials, devices and processes.  
2. Motivate students to learn more about advanced electronic devices and technologies  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to gain: 
1.  Basics of electronic structures of different materials.   
2.  Understanding the physics of electronic materials and devices.    
 
Contents  
Physics of Electronic Materials [12 lectures]:  Introduction, electronic structures, basics of quantum mechanics, 
energy band theory, Free Electron Bands, Band structure in metals and semiconductors, Development of band 
gap, Fermi energy levels, Fermi surface, density of states and charge transport  
Semiconductor Materials [8 lectures]: Intrinsic Semiconductors: carrier concentration, mobility, temperature 
dependence; Extrinsic s emiconductors: Dopant types and materials, Donors and Acceptors, temperature 
dependence of number of carriers, Effective mass, Compound Semiconductors  
Electronic devices [4 lectures]:  p-n junctions, metal -semiconductor contacts, metal -insulator-semiconductor 
capacitors, bipolar junction transistors, junction field-effect transistors, MOSFETs and logics.  
Other electronic materials [8 lectures]:  III-V and II-VI semiconductors, metal oxides, organics, carbon nanotubes 
and 2D semiconductors. 
Optical properties of materials & Applications [10 lectures]: Optical properties of materials: optical constants, index 
of refraction, absorbance, reflectivity, transmissivity, Hagen -Rubens relation; atomistic theory, harmonic 
oscillators. Quantum mechanical treatment of t he optical properties: absorption, optical spectra of materials. 
Applications of the optical properties of materials: Kramers -Kronig analysis, reflection spectra, Lasers, light -
emitting diodes, integrated optoelectronics, waveguides, modulators, switches.  
 
Textbook  
1. Streetman,B.G., Banerjee,S. (2001) Solid state electronic devices, Prentice-Hall of India. 
2. R.E. Hummel, Electronic Properties of Materials, Springer-Verlag, 3rd edition, 2001. 
 
Reference Books  
Sze,S. M., Ng,K.K. (2006) Physics of semiconductor devices, John Wiley & sons. 
 
Online Course Material  
Parasuraman Swaminathan, Electronic materials, devices and fabrication, NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Metallurgical and Materials Engineering, IIT Madras, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113/106/113106062/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17 
 
Title Mechanical Behavior of Materials Number MTL3XX0 
Department  Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type Program 
Compulsory (PC) 
Pre-requisite - 
Objectives 
To provide background on the mechanisms of deformation in engineering materials, and on the evolution of 
material microstructure when subjected to mechanical stress during materials processing and engineering 
applications 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Ability to design materials with improved mechanical properties and identify failure mechanisms in 
materials for engineering applications 
2. To measure important mechanical properties and correlate with the microstructure  
 
Contents 
Continuum Theory of Deformation [2 lectures]: Stress and strain tensor, Generalized Hooke’s Law, Yield Criteria  
Lattice Defects [6 lectures]:  Vacancies and interstitials, dislocations: Edge and Screw, stress fields around edge 
and screw dislocations, strain energy of dislocations, force on dislocation, dislocation -dislocation interaction  
Plastic Deformation [8 lectures]:  Slip in a perfect latt ice, slip by dislocation movement, Critical Resolved Shear 
stress, cross-slip and climb, deformation of single crystals, dislocations in different crystal structures, twinning 
Strengthening Mechanisms [8 lectures]:  Grain boundary strengthening, strain hard ening, solid -solution 
hardening, age-hardening, martensite strengthening  
Fracture and Toughening Mechanisms [6 lectures]: theoretical fracture strength and Griffith’s Law, modes of fracture, 
fracture toughness, brittle and ductile fracture, toughening mechanisms in metals, ceramics, and polymers  
Fatigue and Creep [6 lectures]: Introduction to fatigue, stress and strain -life approach, cyclic stress-strain curve, 
fatigue crack propagation, high temperature deformation, fatigue-creep interaction  
Deformation of Polymers [6 lectures]:  Elastic deformation in semi crystalline polymers, nonlinear elastic 
deformation, shear banding and crazing, stress-strain curves  
 
Text Books 
1. Courtney, T. H., (2005), Mechanical Behaviour of Materials, 2nd Edition, Waveland Press Inc. 
2. Dieter, G.E., (1989), Mechanical Metallurgy, SI Metric Edition, McGraw-Hill Book Company. 
3. Shetty, M. N., (2013), Dislocations and Mechanical Behavior of Materials, Prentice Hall India Learning Private 
Limited 
 
Reference Books  
1. Hertzberg, R.W., (2013), Deformation and Fracture Mechanics of Engineering Materials, 5th Edition, Wiley 
2. McClintock,F.A., and Argon,A.S., (1966), Mechanical Behavior of Materials, Addison-Wesley. 
 
Online Course Material  
Van Vilet, K., 3.22 Mechanical Behavior of Materials, Spring 2008. Massachusetts Institute of Technology: 
MIT OpenCourseWare, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/materials-science-and-engineering/3-22-mechanical-
behavior-of-materials-spring-2008/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18 
 
Title Phase Transformations Number MTL3XX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type Program 
Compulsory 
(PC) 
Prerequisite -   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Explain the importance of phase transformations in solid and liquid state and their applications through 
experimentation 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the microstructure evolution during the phase transformation  
2. Understand the variation of properties with the microstructure evolution towards developing heat 
treatment-microstructure-property relationship 
Contents 
Thermodynamics and Kinetics [6 Lectures]: free energy, order of transformation, driving force, homogeneous and 
heterogeneous nucleation, growth kinetics, coarsening, precipitation 
Phase Transformation during Solidification [4 Lectures]: Eutectic and Peritectic Transformation 
Heat-Treatment of Ferrous and Nonferrous Metals [6 Lectures]: Annealing, Normalizing, Hardening and 
Tempering, Precipitation Hardening 
Interfaces [4 Lectures]:  atomic mechanisms of diffusion, activation energy, interfacial free energy, types of 
interface (coherent, semi-coherent and incoherent interfaces), interface migration 
Diffusional Phase Transformations in Solids [14 Lectures]:  austenite, transformation of austenite, TTT diagram, 
eutectoid transformation, pearlite and bainite  transformation, order -disorder transformation, precipitation 
hardening, spinodal decomposition and massive transformation 
Diffusionless Phase Transformations in Solids [8 Lectures]: Martensite transformation:  characteristics and nature, 
morphology, crystallography, theory of nucleation and growth, and pre -martensite phenomena, martensitic 
transformation in steel. Martensite in non-Ferrous systems-thermoelastic martensite and shape memory effect. 
 
Textbooks 
1. Raghavan,V., (1987), Solid State Phase Transformations, 1st edition, Prentice Hall India,. 
2. Porter,D.A., Easterling,K.E., and Sherif,M.Y., (2009), Phase Transformation in Metals and Alloys, 3rd edition, 
CRC Press,  
3. Abbaschian,R., Abbaschian,L., and Reed -Hill,R.E., (2009), Physical Metallurgy Pri nciples, 4th edition, 
Cengate Learning,  
4. Rajan,T.V., Sharma,C.P., and Sharma,A., (2011), Heat Treatment: Principles and Techniques , 2nd edition, 
Prentice Hall India 
Reference Books 
1. Khachaturyan,A.G., Theory of Structural Transformations in Solids, 1st edition, Dover publications, 2008. 
2. Avner, S.H., Introduction to Physical Metallurgy, 2nd edition, McGraw Hill Education, 2017 
Online Course Material 
Gururajan,M.P., Phase Transformations and Heat Treatment , NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Metallurgical Engineering and Materials Science, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113101003/ 
 
 
 
 
19 
 
Title Iron and Steel Making Number MTL3XX0 
Department  Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type Program Compulsory 
(PC) 
Pre-requisite  
Objectives 
Explain principles of thermodynamics and process metallurgy involved in traditional and advanced iron and 
steel making processes 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Understand the basics of process metallurgy involved in iron and steel making processes 
2. Be cognizant of advanced iron making and steel making processes in industries  
 
Contents 
Introduction to Iron Making and steelmaking [10 lectures]: concept of integrated steel plant, different types of 
ironmaking processes, agglomeration techniques, basic thermodynamics, kinetics and transport phenomena 
in iron and steelmaking processes  
Transport Processes in Blast Furnace [8 lectures]: temperature, burden distribution, and aerodynamics of blast 
furnace, physical and chemical; processes in upper and lower zones of blast furnace  
Alternative Iron Making Processes [8 lectures]:  direct reduction process -DRI, HBI, smelting reduction process -
Corex, Romelt, HiSmelt, Finex etc.  
Modern Steelmaking Processes [10 lectures]: basic oxygen furnace steelmaking, Electric Arc Furnace, and induction 
furnace steelmaking  
Secondary Steelmaking Processes [6 lectures]:  deoxidation, ladle and tundish Metallurgy, continuou s casting, 
casting defects  
 
Text Books 
1. Ghosh,A., and Chatterji,A., (2008), Ironmaking and Steelmaking: Theory and Practice, Prentice-Hall (India) 
2. Turkdogan,E.T., (1997), A Text Book of Steelmaking, Academic Press, London Shetty, M. N., (2013), 
Dislocations and Mechanical Behavior of Materials, Prentice Hall India Learning Private Limited 
3. Chatterjee,A., (1994), Beyond the Blast Furnace, CRC Press 
 
Self-Learning Materials 
Ghosh,A., (2000), Secondary Steelmaking, CRC Press, Boca Raton 
 
Online Course Material  
1. Muzumdar,D., and Koria,S.C., Steelmaking, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Material Science and 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113104013/ 
2. Gupta,G.S., Iron Making, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Materials Engineering, Indian Institute 
of Science Bangalore, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113108079/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
Title Materials Characterization Number MTL3XX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Program Type Program Compulsory 
(PC) 
Prerequisite -   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Explain the principle of the instruments and methods for characterizing different materials and their properties  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Know the basic working principles of various instruments and use the same while performing experiments 
2. Choose the characterization methods based on the requirement and performance  
Contents 
Light Optical Microscopy [6 Lectures]: polarization microscopy, phase contrast microscopy, DIC Microscopy and 
confocal microscopy  
Diffraction Techniques [6 Lectures]: X-Ray Diffraction, Electron Diffraction 
Electron Microscopies [8 Lectures]:  Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) & transmission electron microscopy 
(TEM) 
Scanning Probe Microscopy [6 Lectures]: scanning tunnelling microsc opy (STM) & atomic force microscopy 
(AFM) 
Spectroscopic Characterization [6 Lectures]: UV-VIS-NIR, optical emission, XRF, FTIR, and Raman spectroscopy 
Surface Characterization [6 Lectures]: Auger electron spectroscopy, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy 
Thermal Analysis [4 Lectures]:  thermal mechanical analysis (TMA), differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), 
thermal gravimetric analysis (TGA), differential thermal analysis (DTA)  
 
Textbook 
1. Zhang,S., Li,L. and Kumar,A., (2008), Materials Characterization Techniques, , CRC Press  
2. Cullity, B.D., Stock, S.R., (2014), Elements of X-Ray Diffraction, 3rd Edition, Pearson Education Limited  
 
Reference Books 
1. Evans,C., Brundle.R. and Wilson, (1992), Encyclopaedia of Materials Characterization: Surfaces, Interfaces,  Thin 
Films (Materials Characterization Series), Butterworth-Heinemann,  
2. Kaufmann,E.N., (2012), Characterization of Materials, 3 Volume Set, 2nd Edition, Wiley 
3. Egerton,R., (2016), Physical Principles of Electron Microscopy: An Introduction to TEM, SEM and AEM, 2nd ed. 
Springer 
4. Hwang,J-Y, Monteiro,S.N., Bai,C., Carpenter,J.S., Cai,M., Firrao,D., Kim,B -G., (2012), Characterization 
of Minerals, Metals and Materials, Wiley  
 
Online Course Materials 
1. Shankaran,S., Materials Characterization , NPTEL Course Material, Department of Metallurgical & 
Materials Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113106034/  
2. Alagarsamy,P., Characterization of Materials , NPTEL Course Material, Department of Physics, Indian 
Institute of Technology,  Guwahati, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/115103030/ 
3. Biswas,K. and Gurao,N.P., NPTEL Course Material, Advanced Characterization Techniques, Department of 
Materials Science and Engine ering,  Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113104004/ 
4. Barbastathis,G., Smith,H. and Berggren,K., Submicrometer and Nanometer Technology . Spring 2006. 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology: MIT OpenCourseWare, https://ocw.mit .edu. License: Creative 
Commons BY-NC-SA 
 
 
 
 
21 
 
Course Title Computational Modelling of Materials  Number MTL3XX0 
Department  Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L–T–P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type Program Compulsory 
(PC) 
Pre-requisite - 
Objectives 
1. Introduce modelling in the context of Materials Engineering 
2. Introduce the theory behind the first-principles calculations 
3. Create awareness of the opportunities and limitations of Molecular dynamics simulations  
  
Learning Outcomes 
1. Ability to formulate model and solve initial value and boundary value problems  
2. Understand the working principles of the first-principles calculations and molecular dynamics 
3. Simulate materials using the first-principles calculations and molecular dynamics 
 
Course Content 
Introduction to Modelling in Materials [14 lectures]: Types of linear PDEs, Modelling Diffusion type problems- 
Derivation of Heat Equation, Boundary Conditions, Separation of Variables, Infinite diffusion problem by 
integral transform, 1-D wave equation-Boundary conditions, Steady state problems, Numerical solutions- 
Finite Difference Method 
Molecular Dynamics [14 lectures]: Molecular dynamics: Applications, basic concepts, potential energy 
functions, integration algorithms, temperature control, boundary conditions, neighbour lists, initialization, 
equilibrium, geometry optimization, static properties, dynamical properties, analysis of results, visualisation  
First Principle Calculations-2 [14 lectures]: Notation & Mathematics: Dirac notation, Fourier transformation, 
Function and functional, Quantum mechanics: Schrodinger equation, Born -Oppenheimer approximation, 
Mean-field methods, Kohn-Sham method: Density functional theory, Hohenberg-Kohn theorems, Kohn-
Sham method, Exchange correlation functional, Structure relaxation, Smearing methods, Electronic band 
structure, Fermi-Dirac distribution 
 
Text Books 
1. Rappaz, M., Bellet, M., Deville, M., Numerical Modeling in Materials Science and Engineering, Springer Science 
& Business Media, 2010. 
2. Frenkel, D., Smit, B., Understanding Molecular Simulation: From Algorithms to Applications , 2nd Edition, 
Elsevier 2001. 
3. Lee, J. G., Computational Materials Science: An Introduction, 2nd edition, CRC Press, 2016. 
 
References 
1. Sholl, D. S., and Steckel, J. A., Density Functional Theory: A Practical Introduction, 1st Edition, Wiley, 2009. 
2. Parr, R.G., and Yang, W., Density-Functional Theory of Atoms and Molecules , 1st Edition, Oxford Science 
Publications, 1994. 
3. Lesar, R., Introduction to Compuational Materials Science 
 
Online Course Material  
Ceder, G. and Marzari, N., 3.320 Atomistic Computer Modeling of Materials (SMA 5107). Spring 2005. 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology: MIT OpenCourseWare, https://ocw.mit.edu. License: Creative 
Commons BY-NC-SA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22 
 
Title Materials Processing and Manufacturing Number MTL3XX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type Program Compulsory 
(PC) 
Prerequisite -   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Introduce the various industrially relevant materials processing and manufacturing techniques  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the microstructure evolution during the phase transformation  
2. Understand the variation of properties with the microstructure evolution towards developing heat 
treatment-microstructure-property relationship 
 
Contents 
Bulk Processing of Materials [14 lectures]:  Thermodynamics of solidification, pure metal solidification, Alloy 
Solidification: Constitutional undercooling, dendritic growth. Structure of casting and ingots, Types of casting, 
Heat transfer, Joining- Welding and its types, Brazing and Soldering, Micr ostructural mechanisms associated 
with metals joining operations, Powder Metallurgy, Additive manufacturing of metals.   
Bulk Metal Forming Techniques [14 lectures]:  Rolling- Analysis of rolling, hot and cold rolling, microstructural 
changes during rolling, rolling defects, rolling mill; Forging- open and closed die forging; lubricated and non-
lubricated extrusion.; wire -drawing- die design and materials, optimal die angle, sheet metal forming - 
bending, stretching and deep drawing, anisotropy parameter, forming limit diagram, microstructural changes 
Processing of Ceramics and Polymers [14 lectures]: Ceramic processing: Powder preparations, solid state reactions, 
Sintering, Colloidal processing, Co-precipitation method, Sol-Gel process, Porous ceramics and ceramic fibres. 
Polymer processing: Mixing and compounding, extrusion process, moulding processes, thermoforming, roller 
and blade coating, textile/fiber spinning technology, Additive manufacturing of polymers and ceramics.  
 
Textbooks 
1. Flemings,M.C., (1974), Solidification Processing, Mcgraw-Hill Book Company 
2. Dieter,G.E., (1986), Mechanical Metallurgy, 3rd Edition, McGraw Hill Book Company 
3. El-Kareh, B., Fundamentals of semiconductor processing technology, 3 rd Edition, 1995, Springer US 
 
Reference Books 
1. Chalmers,B., (1967), Principles of Solidification, Wiley 
2. Stefanescu,D.M., (2015), Science and Engineering of Casting Solidification, 3rd edition, Springer  
3. Hosford, W.F., Caddell, R.M., (2014), Metal Forming: Mechanics and Metallurgy, 4 th Edition, Cambridge 
University Press 
 
Online Course Material 
1. Shekhar, S., Fundamentals of Materials Process ing (Part –1), NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Materials Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113/104/113104073/ 
2. Shekhar, S., Fundamentals of Materials Processing (Part –2), NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Materials Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113/104/113104075/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23 
 
Title Materials for Energy Conversion and Storage  Number MTL4XX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type Program Elective (PE) 
Prerequisite -   
Objectives  
The course outlines in a nutshell: 
1. Different modes of energy conversion and storage  
2. Development of materials with time and different applications, scale, energy and power density  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to gain knowledge on: 
1.  Structure processing property performance relationship of the energy materials developed over time.  
2.  Different modes of energy conversion and storage with respect to scale, cost, energy and power density  
 
Contents  
Introduction [2 lectures]:  Classification, Overview of Electrical (static), Electrochemical, Thermal, Mechanical, 
Photo-electrochemical (includes biological) energy storage. 
Electrical (static) [4 lectures]: Capacitor, Leyden Jar, corona discharge, dielectrics.  
Electrochemical con version and storage [14 lectures]:  Introduction to Electrolytic capacitor, Electrochemical cell 
(Battery), Supercapacitor, primary and secondary batteries, Li-ion battery, fuel cells.  
Photo-electrochemical conversion [4 lectures]: Photo-electric effect, artificial photo synthesis, semiconductor based 
solar cells, dye-synthesized solar cells. 
Thermal conversion and storage [8 lectures]:  Solar thermal energy conversion, sterling en gines,  Molten salt  
technology, eutectic mixtures, Phase-change materials, thermoelectric materials.  
Mechanical storage [6 lectures]: Pumped storage, gravity batteries, Compressing air storage, flywheels. 
Carbon Materials for Energy conversion and storage [4 lectures]:  Hybridization and carbon allotropes overview, 
Synthesis and characterization of carbon all otropes, Functionalization of carbon materials, Carbon 
nanomaterials for energy conversion and storage. 
 
Textbook  
Cheong K.Y., Impellizzeri,G and  Fraga,M.A., (2018), Emerging Materials for Energy Conversion and Storage , 1st 
Edition, Elsevier 
 
Reference Book 
Rosen, M.A., (2012) Energy Storage, Nova 
 
Online Course Materials  
1.  Prof. Bazant M., MITopencourseware: Electrochemical Energy Systems, MIT  Course Number 10.626 / 
10.426, 
    https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/chemical-engineering/10-626-electrochemical-energy-systems-spring-2014/  
2. Prof. Pal K., Selection Of Nanomaterials For Energy Harvesting And Storage Application , NPTEL Course 
Material, Mechanical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112/107/112107283/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24 
 
Title Extraction of Nonferrous Metals Number MTL3XX0 
Department  Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type Program Compulsory 
(PC) 
Pre-requisite - 
Objectives 
Explain principles of thermodynamics and process metallurgy involved in traditional and advanced 
processes of nonferrous metal extraction 
 
Learning Outcomes 
Understand the basics of extractive metallurgy involved in nonferrous metal extraction processes 
 
Contents 
Early developments in metal extraction [2 lectures]: Nonferrous metals in Indian history, uses of nonferrous metals, 
Sources of nonferrous metals  
Principles of metals extraction  [4 lectures]:  Thermodynamic principles, homogeneous and heterogeneous 
reactions, Ellingham diagram, kinetic principles, principles of electro-chemistry 
General methods of extraction [10 lectures]: Pyrometallurgy – calcination, roasting and smelting, Hydrometallurgy 
– leaching, solvent extraction, ion exchange, precipitation, and electrometallurgy – electrolysis and electro -
refining)  
General methods of refining [4 lectures]: Basic approaches, preparation of pure compounds, purification of crude 
metal produced in bulk  
Extraction of metals from oxide sources  [6 lectures]: Basic approaches and special features of specific extraction 
processes, extraction of metals such as magnesium, aluminum, tin and ferro -alloying elements, production of 
ferro alloys.  
Extraction of metal s from Sulphide Ores  [6 lectures]:  Pyro-metallurgy and hydrometallurgy of sulphides, 
production of metals such as copper, lead, zinc, nickel etc.  
Extraction of metals from Halides [6 lectures]: Extraction of metals from halides: Production of halides and refining 
methods, Methods of extraction of metals such as titanium, rare earths, uranium, thorium, plutonium, 
beryllium, zirconium etc.  
Production of precious metals [2 lectures]: Methods applied for gold, silver and Pt group of metals  
Waste Utilization [2 lectures]: Secondary metals and utilization of wastes, Energy and environmental issues in 
nonferrous metals extraction  
 
Text Books 
1. Ray, H.S., Sridhar, R. and Abraham, K.P. Extraction of nonferrous metals, Affiliated East West Press Pvt 
Ltd., New Delhi (2007)  
2. Dennis, W.H., Extractive Metallurgy, Philosophical Library, New York (1965)  
 
Self-Learning Materials 
Ray, H.S., and Ghosh, A., Principles of extractive metallurgy, Wiley Eastern Ltd., New Delhi, 1991 
 
Online Course Material  
Ray, H.S., Non-ferrous Extractive Metallurgy, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Materials and 
Metallurgical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113/105/113105021/ 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
Title Smart Materials Number MTL4XX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Materials Engineering Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Nil   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce the family of smart materials along with their mechanisms, design and applications  
2.  Provide appreciation to utilize smart materials in context of smart engineering structure 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to gain: 
1. Basic understanding of intelligent materials and their utilization 
2. Methodology of newer materials development towards specific applications 
 
Contents 
Introduction [6 lectures]: Basic definitions, classification of smart materials, modification of material structures, 
stimuli for reversible shape and structural transformation   
Shape Memory Alloys (SMA) [8 Lectures]:  Shape memory and superelasticity  effects, Microstructural 
mechanisms, Range of SMA, phases and crystal structure, Processing (training), bonding and joining, High 
temperature SMA, Magnetic SMA, Giant magnetostrictive material, Thin films, Applications  
Polymeric Smart Materials [14 lectu res]: Functionally graded polymer blend, Smart performances; Electro -
conductive polymers, Electro -chromatic Sol -Gel, Smart drug delivery systems, Bio -medical sensing, Self -
healing materials, Nanoparticles, Porous particles, Smart widows,  Flip -chip under-fill, Magneto-rheological 
fluids, Thermo-responsive polymers, Information materials and adaptive architecture, Application in forensic 
science  
 Ceramic Smart Materials [6 lectures]: Piezoelectric and electrostrictive ceramics, Non-contact ultrasonic material 
testing and analysis, Hydrothermal synthesis of smart ceramics, Intelligent control of phase assemblage, 
crystal size and morphology 
Smart Composites [4 lectures]:  Design and characterization of magnetostrictive composites, Carbon 
nanomaterials based ya rns and nanocomposites, Structural health monitoring and self -healing, Active fiber 
composites  
Smart Textiles [2 lectures]: Smart textile for medicine and health care, Textile based electronic components  
Integration of Smart Materials and Smart Structures  [2 lectures]:  Varying smart materials and multifunctions, 
Biotelemetry study, Structure design concepts, Applications  
  
Laboratory Experiments  
NA 
 
Textbook  
1. Schwartz M. (Ed.) (2009) Smart Materials, CRC Press, Taylor and Francis Group 
2.  Hou X. (Ed.) (2016), Design, Fabrication, Properties and Applications of Smart and Advanced Materials, 
CRC Press 
3.  Elhajjar et al. (Eds.) (2014) Smart Composites Mechanics and Design, LLC, Taylor and Francis Group  
 
Reference Books  
Guardia, M., Esteve-Turrillas F.A. (Eds.) (2019) Handbook of Smart Materials in Analytical Chemistry, Vol. 1, 
Wiley  
 
Online Course Material  
1.  Bhattacharya B, Smart Materials and Intelligent System Design (Video); IIT Kanpur, 2018,  
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112104251/#  
2. Bhat K.N. et al., Micro and Smart Systems, IISc Bangalore. NPTEL 2012, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112108092/ 
 
 
26 
 
Title Electronic Materials Lab Number MTL3XX0 
Department Metallurgical & Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 0-0-3 [1.5] 
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type Program Compulsory (PC) 
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The objective of the course is to introduce the students to different  types of electrical and electronic property 
characterization and instrumentation. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
Upon successful completion of the course students will get a first -hand knowledge of device fabrication and 
then measure and analyse the functional properties of the materials. 
 
Laboratory Experiments  
1. Impedance Spectroscopy: Impedance Measurements as a function of temperature   
2. Measurement of Dielectric and Ferroelectric properties of Materials  
3. Piezoelectric Effect: Measurement of piezoelectric constants 
4. Preparation of structures using photolithography  
5. Deposition of metallic electrodes using thermal evaporation method  
6. Semiconducting thin films using solution/printing processes 
7. Measuring electrical resistance and sheet resistance of semiconductors  
8. Effect of temperature on the electrical conductivity of semiconductors 
9. Electrical characterization of p-n junction diodes 
10. Magnetic Measurements: M-H hysteresis, M vs T measurement 
11. Optical Property measurements 
 
Textbook  
Specific Laboratory protocols and handouts will be made for different experiments. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
27 
 
Title Physical Metallurgy Lab Number MTL3XX0 
Department  Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 0–0–3 [1.5] 
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type Program Compulsory (PC) 
Pre-requisite - 
Objectives 
To introduce the students to different types of phase transformations in solid and liquid state experiments 
and to provide hands-on training on various mechanical testing equipment to measure mechanical properties 
of materials. 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to  
1. Apply the knowledge of phase transformation to understand microstructure and mechanical property 
evolution in materials 
2. Measure mechanical properties of materials 
 
Laboratory Experiments 
1. Uniaxial monotonic stress-strain response of metals, ceramics, and polymers  
2. Hardness via spherical and Vickers indentation and correlation with yield strength  
3. Effects of annealing, normalizing, and hardening heat treatments on microstructure and mechanica l 
properties of steels  
4. The effects of grain size on yield strength  
5. Effects of cold working and subsequent annealing on microstructure and mechanical properties  
6. Hardenability of steels using Jominy end quench test  
7. Age hardening study of a range of aerospace materials (Al-alloys, Ti-alloys, superalloys) 
8. Activation energy and Stored energy calculation for phase transformation  
9. Measurement of quasi-static and indentation fracture toughness 
10. Measurement of impact fracture toughness using Charpy/Izod impact test  
11. Fracture surface interpretation using SEM 
12. Creep of a 60%Sn-40%Pb Solder wire at room temperature  
 
Textbook  
Specific Laboratory protocols and handouts will be made for different experiments.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28 
 
Title Materials Characterization Lab Number MTL3XX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 0-0-2 [1] 
Offered for B.Tech. Program Type Program Compulsory (PC) 
Prerequisite -   
Objectives 
Hands on training on instruments and methods for characterizing different materials and their properties  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability handle various material characterization tools.  
 
Laboratory Experiments 
1. Quantitative metallogrphic analysis of metals, ceramics, polymers and composites  
2. Electropolishing of aluminium alloys 
3. Grain refinement studies using polarization microscope 
4. Crystal structure determination using X-ray Diffraction analysis  
5. Crystallite size measurement using X-ray Diffraction analysis  
6. Indexing of selected area diffraction pattern  
7. Specific heat and enthalpy calculation using DSC analysis  
8. Phase transformation during solidification using thermal analysis 
9. FTIR analysis of ceramic materials 
10. UV-Visible spectroscopy analysis of thin films 
Textbook  
Specific Laboratory protocols and handouts will be made for different experiments.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29 
 
Course Title Computational Modeling of Materials Lab 
 
Number MT3LXX0 
Department  Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L–T–P [C] 0–0–2 [1] 
Offered for B.Tech. 3rd Year Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite  
Objectives 
Hands-on training in running simulations. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
Simulate materials using numerical methods, molecular dynamics, first-principles calculations  
 
Course Content 
Numerical modelling Exercises 
1. One-Dimensional Transient Heat Conduction: Numerical implementation  
2. Diffusion equation: finite difference method 
3. 1D-wave equation 
 
Molecular dynamics Exercises 
1. Calculate the energy in different crystal lattice structures 
2. Determination of coefficient of thermal expansion 
3. Application of tensile load and visualize the results  
4. Determination of bulk modulus 
 
First-principles calculations Exercises 
1. Preparation of input files and visualisation of structures 
2. Optimisation of simulation parameters. 
3. Determination of equilibrium lattice parameter 
4. Structure optimisation using a variable-cell method 
 
Text Books 
1. Rappaz, M., Bellet, M., Deville, M., Numerical Modeling in Materials Science and Engineering, Springer Science 
& Business Media, 2010. 
2. Frenkel, D., Smit, B., Understanding Molecular Simulation: From Algorithms to Applications , 2nd Edition, 
Elsevier 2001. 
3. Lee, J. G., Computational Materials Science: An Introduction, 2nd edition, CRC Press, 2016. 
 
References 
1. Sholl, D. S., and Steckel, J. A., Density Functional Theory: A Practical Introduction, 1st Edition, Wiley, 2009. 
2. Parr, R.G., and Yang, W., Density-Functional Theory of Atoms and Molecules , 1st Edition, Oxford Science 
Publications, 1994. 
 
Online Course Material  
Ceder, G. and Marzari, N., 3.320 Atomistic Computer Modeling of Materials (SMA 5107). Spring 2005. 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology: MIT OpenCourseWare, https://ocw.mit.edu. Li cense: Creative 
Commons BY-NC-SA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
Title Materials Processing and Manufacturing Lab Number MTL3XX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 0-0-3 [1.5] 
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type Program Compulsory (PC) 
Prerequisite -   
Objectives 
Hands on training on various industrially relevant materials processing and manufacturing techniques  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to handle various material processing and manufacturing 
equipment.  
 
Laboratory Experiments 
1. Injection molding of polymers 
2. Blade coating of polymers 
3. Sol-gel processing of ceramics  
4. Sintering of ceramics 
5. Melting and Casting of Aluminum Alloys 
6. Welding of steels 
7. Welding of Aluminum alloys 
8. Additive manufacturing of polymers 
9. Additive manufacturing of ceramics 
 
Textbook  
Specific Laboratory protocols and handouts will be made for different experiments.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
31 
 
Title Energy Materials Lab  Number MTL4XX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 0-0-3 [1.5] 
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type Program Elective (PE) 
Prerequisite -   
Objectives  
The course outlines in a nutshell: 
1. Different modes of energy conversion and storage  
2. Development of materials with time and different applications, scale, energy and power density  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to gain knowledge on: 
1.  Structure processing property performance relationship of the energy materials developed over time.  
2.  Different modes of energy conversion and storage with respect to scale, cost, energy and power density  
 
Laboratory Experiments  
1. Demonstration of static electricity storage with electrostatic generator, Corona effect, Energy storage in 
Leyden jar. Fabrication of a capacitor 
2. Charging and discharging of a capacitor, Measuring the capacitance of a Capacitor, Role of capacitor in 
voltage stabilizing/regulating, filtering 
3. Fabrication and operation of a Lead -acid battery, Charge discharge voltammetry/EIS characteristics of 
Lead-acid battery 
4. Fabrication and operation of a Lithium -ion battery, half -cell and full cell configuration, Charge 
discharge/voltammetry/EIS characteristics of Lithium-ion battery 
5. Degradation test for lithium ion batteries, Use of different cathodes, Cell fabrication and dismantling, 
observation of structural changes, effect of temperature 
6. Battery aging and self-discharge of lead-acid and lithium ion battery, battery for electric vehicles 
7. Conversion of carbon dioxide into propane through artificial photosynthesis  
8. Experimental Evaluation of a Paraffin as Phase Change Material for Thermal Energy Storage  
9. Modelling and validation of a flywheel energy storage, modelling of gravity assisted storage systems (can 
be taken before) 
10. Synthesis of different forms of carbon nanomaterials for capacitor, artificial photosynthesis devices and 
electrodes for batteries, observation of diff erent morphologies and structural reversibility (demonstration 
experiment, make it simple) 
 
Textbook  
Specific Laboratory protocols and handouts will be made for different experiments.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
32 
 
15. Program Elective Courses 
 
Title Processing-Microstructure and Properties of Steels Number MT4XXX 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type Program Elective 
(PE) 
Prerequisite None   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Describe the processing-structure-property relationship of steels used in engineering applications 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Design the processing routes to obtain steel microstructures that will provide customizable properties to the 
component for specific engineering applications  
 
Contents 
Processing of Steels [6 lectures]: Melting and casting, Steel refining by ESR and VIM, and VAR, heat treatment of 
steels, thermo-mechanical processing of steels, sheet metal forming and welding of steels  
Physical Metallurgy of Steels  [12 lectures]:  Effects of alloying elements on Fe -C phase diagram, structure and 
transformation kinetics of p earlite, interphase precipitation, divorced pearlite, Martensite -crystal structure, 
transformation kinetics, morphology, Bainite -Bainite start temperature, upper and lower bainite, bainitic 
microstructure, Widmanstattaen ferrite, acicular and equiaxed ferr ite  
Low Carbon Steels  [8 lectures]:  types of low carbon steels, hot -rolled ferrite -pearlite steels, processing by hot 
rolling, cold -rolling and annealing, interstitial free steel, HSLA steel, Dual -phase (DP) steel, TRIP steels, 
applications  
Medium and High Carbon Steels [8 lectures]:  microalloyed steel-microstructure and mechanical properties, rail 
steels, patenting-pearlite formation in high strength steel wire, drawing of pearlitic high carbon steel wires, 
hardening and tempering process, temper embrittlement, tool steels, applications  
Stainless Steels [4 lectures]: alloy design for stainless steels, austenitic, ferritic and martensitic stainless steels, 
precipitation hardened and duplex stainless steels, applications 
Surface Hardened Steels  [4 lectur es]: carburizing, Nitriding, carbo -nitriding, induction hardening, flame 
hardening  
 
Textbooks 
Krauss,G., (2005), Steels: Processing, Structure, and Performance, 2nd Edition, ASM International  
 
Reference Books 
Bhadeshia,H.K.D.H, Honycombe,R.W.K, (2017), Steels: Microstructures and Properties, 4th Edition, Butterworth-
Heinemann  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
33 
 
Title Degradation and Failure of Materials Number MTL4XX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type Program Elective (PE) 
Prerequisite -   
Objectives  
The instructor will explain 
1. About materials degradation due to different types of corrosion, their mechanisms and inhibition.  
2. Failures resulting due to corrosion and corrosion prevention 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to gain: 
1.  Basic understanding on the possibility, outcome and rate of corrosion.  
2.  Knowledge on selection of corrosion resistant materials even before designing  
 
Contents 
Introduction [4 lectures]:  Definitions, Different forms of Environmental degradation, Cost of Corrosion, 
Electrochemical Nature, Aims 
 
Thermodynamics of Corrosion [10 lectures]: Process at Interface, Free Energy and Electrochemical Potential, EMF 
Series, Nernst Relationship, Import ant Reactions, Cell Potential, Reference Electrodes, Pourbaix diagram and 
its important in metal corrosion, Calculation of Pourbaix diagram for Al, Cu, Ni and Fe.  
 
Kinetics of Corrosion [10 lectures]:  Current Density and Corrosion Rate, Corrosion Rate Expr essions, Exchange 
Current Density, Polarization, Activation, Concentration and Resistance polarization, Mixed potential theory.  
 
Types of Corrosion and Failures [8 lectures]:  Major forms of corrosion and failures originating due to corrosion, 
Hydrogen embrittlement, Corrosion fatigue  
 
Corrosion testing and protection [6 lectures]:  Corrosion experiments - Potentiodynamic test - Galvanostatic test - 
Linear Polarization-Immersion test - Salt fog test. Electrochemical ways: Sacrificial anode, Impressed current  
cathodic protection, Anodic protection, Environmental control over corrosion - Coating – Inhibitor. 
 
Oxidation of Metals and Alloys [4 lectures]:  Pilling Bedworth Ratio - Thermodynamics of oxidation: Ellingham 
diagram, of oxidation - Effect of doping on the oxidation behaviour. 
 
Laboratory Experiments  
NA 
 
Textbook  
Fontana M. G. (1987) Corrosion Engineering, 3rd Edition, McGraw Hill Book Company  
 
Reference Books  
Zaki A. (2006) Principles of Corrosion Engineering and Corrosion Control, Elsevier Science & Technology 
Books. 
 
Online Course Material  
Mondal K., Corrosion - Part I and II, NPTEL Course Material, Metallurgy & Material Science, Indian Institute 
of Technology Kanpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113104082/, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113/104/113104089/  
 
 
 
 
 
 
34 
 
Title Composites Number MT3XX0 
Department  Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type Program Elective (PE) 
Pre-requisite - 
Objectives 
The main objective of this course is  
1. To introduce structure and processing of composites 
2. To and uses of composites  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to 
1. Classification and application of different composite materials and their processing techniques  
2. Acquire understanding about the structure property relationship of different types of  composites 
 
Contents 
Introduction and Classification of Composites [6 lectures]:  Composites, matrix: metal matrix composites, polymer 
matrix composites, ceramic matrix composites, fiber reinforcements: fiber  types, particulate reinforcements, 
nanocomposites 
Design and Manufacturing of Composites [14 lectures]: Selection of matrix and reinforcement- Reinforcement with 
Aligned 
Continuous Fibers and Discontinuous fibers, wettability and role of interface; Manufa cturing- Hand and 
Prepeg layup, Bag molding, Autoclave Processing, Compression Molding, Resin Transfer Molding, Pultrusion; 
Metal-Matrix Composites- Solid state and Liquid State processing; Ceramic -Matrix Composites- Solid state, 
sol-gel, co-precipitation and hydrothermal techniques 
 
Tailoring Composite Materials [6 lectures]:  by component selection, by interface modification, surface 
modification, microstructure control 
 
Basic Mechanics of Composites [8 lectures]: Fiber-Matrix interface- theories of adhesion, glass fiber-polyester resin 
interface, measurement of bond strength, Elastic properties -unidirectional lamiae, elastic properties of short 
fiber composite materials,  strength of a unidirectional laminae, fiber pull  out, longitudinal and transverse 
tensile and compressive strength, in-plane shear strength 
 
Properties and Applications of Composites [8 lectures]:  Monotonic properties, fatigue and creep properties of 
composites, Applications of Composites- Materials for Lightweight Structures, Materials for civil infrastructure, 
Materials for Aerospace components- propeller blades, turbine blades, space applications  
 
Textbook  
1. Clyne, T. W. and Hull, D., (2019) An Introduction to Composite  Materials, 3rd edition, Cambridge University 
Press. 
2. Balasubramanian, M., (2013), Composite Materials and Processing, 1st Edition, CRC Press  
 
Reference Book 
Matthews F. L. and Rawlings R. D. (1999) Composite Materials, 1st edition, Woodhead Publishing. 
 
Online Course Material  
Prof. Nachiketa Tewari, Introduction To Composites, Aerospace Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology 
Kanpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112/104/112104229/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
Title Polymeric Materials and Processing Number MTL4XX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type Program Elective (PE) 
Prerequisite -   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
Provide background on basics of processing, structure and properties of polymers of engineering applications 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to gain: 
1.  Basic understanding of structure-property relationship in polymers 
2.  Knowledge about synthesis, and processing of polymers for engineering applications 
 
Contents  
Structure of Polymers [14 lectures]: Basics definitions, molar mass averages, Tacticity and isomerism, Amorphous 
and semi -crystalline polymers, free volume theory, crystal structure and its determination, degree of 
crystallinity, melting and crystallization, defects in crystalline polymers, polymer blends, block -copolymers, 
elastomers (Offered by Chemical Engineering) 
 
Synthesis and Processing of Polymers  [14 lectures]:  Polymerization conditions and polymer reactions; Melt 
Processing, Extrusion, Injection Molding, Thermosets and Thermoforming; Plastics Technology: Molding, 
Extrusion, multipolymer systems and composites, additives and compounding; Elastomer Technology: 
vulcanization, elastomer compounding (Offered by MT) 
 
Polymer Rheology and Mechanical Behavior [4 lectures]:  Viscous flow, Storage and Loss modulus, visco-elasticity 
- creep, stress relaxation, kinetic theory of rubber elasticity (Offered by MT) 
 
Characterization of Polymers [10 lectures]:  Measurement of mo lecular weight and size: end group analysis, 
thermal analysis, colligative property measurement, dynamic light scattering, gel permeation 
chromatography, X-ray scattering, Spectroscopic methods (Offered by MT) 
 
Laboratory Experiments  
NA 
 
Textbook  
Young R.J. and Lovell P.A. (2011) Introduction to Polymers, 3rd Edition, CRC Press 
 
Reference Books  
1. Chanda M. (2006) Introduction to Polymer Science & Chemistry, CRC Press 
2. Baird,D.G, Collias,D.I., (2014), Polymer Processing, Wiley 
 
Online Course Material  
Adhikari B, Science & Technology of Polymers, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Metallurgy & Material 
Science, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113105028/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
36 
 
Title Ceramics and Glass Number MT4XX 
Department  Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–2 [4] 
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type Program Elective (PE) 
Pre-requisite - 
Objectives 
The main objective of this course is to 
Impart and introduce the basic concepts and uses of ceramics and glass.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
Upon successful completion of the course the student  
1. Would have the knowledge of basic science and technology involved in ceramic materials and glass.  
2. Be cognizant of various processing techniques involved in the creation of products.  
 
Contents  
Ceramic Compounds & Materials [8 lectures]:  Chemistry of ceramics , crystal structure and bonding in ceramic 
materials, defect chemistry in ceramics, Polymorphism, Ceramic raw materials (Clay, Silicate, Zirconia), 
Mechanical and Thermal properties of ceramics  
Sintering and Microstructure of Ceramics [6 lectures]: Thermodynamics and kinetics, Mass Transport, Solid phase 
sintering, Liquid phase sintering, Sintering additives, Pressure sintering  
Ceramic Processing  [8 lectures]:  Ceramic Powder Characterization, Rheological behaviour of slurries, Particle 
packing, Forming Processes: Dry pressing, Semi dry pressing, Plastic forming method: extrusion and injection 
molding, Sol-gel processing, Casting methods: slip casting, tape casting, Drying and Firing process  
Non-oxide Ceramics [2 lectures]:  Silicon nitride, Aluminum nitride, Silicon carbide, Boron carbide  
Industrial Applications of Ceramics [9 lectures]:  Refractories, Abrasives, Whitewares, Cement, Ceramic Coatings, 
Nuclear Ceramics, Bio Ceramics  
Glass [9 lectures]: Structure of glass, Thermodynamics and Kinetics of Glass , Physics of glass, Thermal & 
Mechanical properties, Coloring, Glass production, Glass-Ceramics  
 
Laboratory Experiments 
1. Chemical Analysis of Raw materials 
2. Characterization of Ceramic powder: Tap density, Particle Size Analysis  
3. Thermal analysis of ceramic powders using DTA / TGA / DTGA 
4. Ceramic powder preparation:  
5. Measurement of Green Strength and Green Density of Ceramics 
6. Sintering of Ceramics: Measurement of sintering density, microstructure and phase analysis  
7. Casting and Forming Lab 
8. Preparation of Soda-Lime-Silica glass with different colouring oxides, e.g. CoO, FeO etc.  
9. Preparation of Boro-silicate glass with alkali & alkaline earth oxides. 
 
Text Books 
1. Kingery,W.D., Bowen, H.K., and Uhlmann, D.R., Introduction to Ceramics, John Wiley & Sons  
2. Barsoum,M.W., Fundamentals of Ceramics, CRC Press 
3. Shelby,J.E., (2005) Introduction to Glass Science and TechnologyThe Royal Society of Chemistry  
 
Self-Learning Materials 
1. Reed,J.S., Introduction to the principles of ceramic processing 
4. Tooley,F.V., Hand Book of Glass Manufacture – Vol. I & II, Ogden Publishing Co., NY 
 
Online Course Material  
Juejun Hu, Amorphous Materials, DMSE MIT, MIT OCW, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/materials-science-
and-engineering/3-071-amorphous-materials-fall-2015/index.htm 
 
 
 
 
37 
 
Title Casting and Solidification Number MT6XX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type Program Elective (PE) 
Prerequisite None   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Impart fundamental understanding of various casting processes and the theory of solidification  
2. Discuss design methodology and process parameters involve in obtaining defect free casting.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Understand of solidification of metals and alloys and correlating with various casting processes 
 
Contents 
Conventional and Special Casting Techniques [14 Lecture]:  Casting Terminology, Types of pattern and allowances, 
Applications and Challenges; Expendable and Permanent Mould Casting Processes. Special casting 
techniques: investment casti ng, rheocasting and thixocasting, squeeze casting, high and low pressure die 
casting, continuous casting. 
Solidification of metals and alloys [14 Lecture]:  Heat flow, plain front solidification, cellular solidification, 
constitutional undercooling, formation of dendrites, eutectic solidification, monotectic solidification.  
Gating design and casting defects [14 Lecture]:  Fluid flow, gating and riser design, Adams’ and Caine’s riser 
design, fluidity. Casting defects: classification, remedial measures, qualit y assessment. 
 
Textbooks 
Flemings,M.C., Solidification Processing (1974), Mcgraw-Hill Book Company 
Campbell,J., (2015), Complete casting Handbook: Metal Casting Processes, Metallurgy, Techniques and Design ,   
Butterworth-Heinmann 
 
Reference Books  
1. Heine R. W, Loper C. R., and Rosenthal P. C., (2008), Principles of Metal Casting, Tata McGraw Hill  
2. Davies, G. J., (1973) Solidification and Casting, Wiley,  
3. Stefanescu, D. M., Science and Engineering of Casting Solidification, (2015), 3rd edition, Springer  
 
Online Course Materials 
Karunakar, D.B., Metal Casting , NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mechanical and Industrial 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/ 112107083/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
38 
 
Title Metallurgy of Joining Number MT6XX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Program Type Program Elective (PE) 
Prerequisite -   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Introduce the basics of materials joining techniques and the associated metallurgy of welds  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Understand the importance of the materials joining in structural applications. 
2.  Study the fundamentals of welding microstructures and properties  
 
Contents  
Materials Joining basics [6 lectures]: Materials joining basics, type of joints, Types of welding techniques, heat 
input and joining efficiency, importance of welding in structural applications 
Fusion welding [8 lectures]: Important welding techniques such as submerged arc welding, flux core arc welding, 
tungsten inert gas welding, Metal inert gas welding, plasma arc welding, electron beam welding,  laser beam 
welding.      
Solid state welding [8 lectures]: Important welding techniques like Diffusion bonding, friction welding, friction 
stir welding, adhesive joining, ultrasonic welding, forge welding 
Metallurgy of fusion welding [8 lectures]: Fusion zone, partially melted zone, heat affected zone, residual stresses 
in welding, epitaxial growth during welding, heat transfer in welding  
Metallurgy of solid state welding [6 lectures]: materials plasticization, bonding interfaces, effect of processing 
parameters, heat input in welding  
Case Studies [6 lectures]: fusion welding of Al alloys, Friction stir welding of Mg alloys, Laser beam welding of Al alloys 
and steel 
 
Textbook  
1. Kou S., (2003), Welding Metallurgy, 2rd Edition, Jhon Willey and Sons, New Jersey, United States 
2. Lippold J.C., (2015) Welding Metallurgy and Weldability, Jhon Willey and Sons, New Jersey, United States 
 
Reference Books 
Reeser M.A., (2017), Welding complete: Techniques, project plans and instructions, cool springs press, MA 
USA. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
39 
 
Title Battery Materials Number MTL4XX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type Program Elective (PE) 
Prerequisite Thermodynamics, Corrosion   
Objectives  
Through this course the instructor  
Will provide an insight of development of battery materials  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to gain knowledge on: 
1. Cycling behaviour of the batteries. 
2. Development of different types of batteries demanding on application, Merits and demerits of each 
batteries. 
3. Materials developed so far and future goals to be achieved.  
 
Contents  
Introduction to Electrochemistry [8 lectures]:  Chemical and Electrochemical Reactions, Components of 
electrochemical cells, Operation of a Cell, Self -Discharge, Theoretical Cell Voltage, Capacity, and Energy, 
Specific Energy and Energy Density, Thermodynamic Background, Variation of the Voltage with D ischarging 
and Recharging, Cycling Behaviour. 
Battery Characteristics, Performance, Design, Selection & Standardization [2 lectures]:  General Characteristics and 
Factors Affecting Battery Performance, Battery Design and Construction, Selection and Applicat ion of 
Batteries, Battery Standardization  
History and evolution of Batteries [6 lectures]:  Primary Batteries, voltaic pile, Daniell cell, Zinc -Carbon Batteries, 
Alkaline-Manganese Dioxide Batteries, Secondary Batteries, Lead-Acid Batteries, Nickel-Iron Batteries, Nickel-
Cadmium Batteries, Nickel -Zinc Batteries, Nickel -Hydrogen Batteries, Nickel -Metal Hydride Batteries, 
Lithium-Ion Batteries. 
Development of Negative Electrodes  [8 lectures]: The lead electrode, Aluminium and Magnesium electrode, Zinc 
and Cadmium Electrode in Aqueous Systems, Metal Hydride Electrodes, Negative Electrodes in Lithium Cells 
Development of Positive Electrodes [8 lectures]: Manganese Dioxide/ The “Nickel” Electrode / Lea d oxide 
electrode/ Oxygen electrode Electrodes in Aqueous Systems.  
Development of Electrolytes [10 lectures]:  Liquid Electrolytes, General Considerations Regarding the Stability of 
Electrolytes Vs. Alkali Metals, Elevated Temperature Electrolytes for Alka li Metals, Electrolyte Stability 
Windows and Their Extension, Composite Structures That Combine Stability Regimes, Solid Electrolytes.  
 
Laboratory Experiments  
NA 
 
Textbook  
Huggins R. A. (2009) Advanced Batteries: Materials Science Aspects, 1st Edition, Springer 
 
Reference Books  
Linden D. and Reddy T. B. (2002) Handbook of Batteries, 3rd Edition, The McGraw-Hill Companies 
 
Online Course Material  
Prof. Bazant M., MITopencourseware: Electrochemical Energy Systems, MIT Course Number 10.626 / 10.4 26, 
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/chemical-engineering/10-626-electrochemical-energy-systems-spring-2014/  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
Title 3-D Printing: Material Processing and Properties Number MTL4XX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Materials Engineering Type PE 
Prerequisite Nil   
Objectives  
The Instructor will introduce: 
1.  Importance of 3-D printing of materials for various range of applications  
2.   Process control and product quality evaluation through application of basics  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to gain: 
1.  Insight of the evolutionary technology for rapid and cost effective growth of products 
2.  Aptitude to translate the knowledge into novel components with industrialization competitiveness  
 
Contents  
Introduction [5 lectures]: 3-D printing small but multipurpose product inspiration, Science fiction to innovation, 
Multidisciplinary terminology, Current system configurations, Construction, Classification  
Hardware – software – material Interdependence [5 lectures]: Essence of hardware, software and materials, Impact 
on systems engineering in various industries, Processing philosophy  
Raw Materials  [4 lectures]: Forms and sources of raw materials, Processing methods and characteristic 
properties, Material specifications based industries and processing technology e.g. aerospace, medicine  
3-D Printing  Processes [2 lectures]: Process flow and basics of stages involved, Process control, Upgrading 
options, 3-D product design, evaluation, justification and integration (DEJI) model  
Additive Manufacturing of Metallic Systems  [5 lectures]: Light metals and al loys, Superalloys, Intermetallic 
compounds, Shape memory alloys, porous metals, Rare earth permanent magnets  
Thermo-mechanical Effects [2 lectures]: Phase transformation, Microstructure evolution, Variation in properties, 
Thermo-mechanical modeling of microstructure evolution and mechanical properties 
3-D Printing of Polymers and  Hydrogels  [5 lectures]: Natural polymers, Synthetic polymers, Design 
considerations and guidelines, Mechanics modeling, AM of tooling for mass production processes, 3 -D 
bioprinting hardware,  Reactive inkjet printing of nylon materials, Stimuli responsive hydrogels, Biopolymer 
hydrogel biolinks 
3-D Printing of Ceramics  and composites [5 lectures]: Processing technology and options, Laminated object 
manufacturing, Laser Engineered n et shaping, Bio -active ceramics and bio -active glasses,  Engineering 
ceramics, Green -tape-based AM, Complex ceramic architecture, Metal matrix composites, Ceramic matrix 
composites, Polymer matrix composites and their variants, Nano-composites         
 Special Purpose 3-D Printing [5 lectures]: Functionally grades materials, Bio -medical applications, Biomematic 
design model, Frugal design sustainability,  Smart material - DNA origami, 4 -D printing, Reconstructive 
surgery, Patient specific 3-D printing,  Hydrogen storage material, Printed and hybrid electronics enabled by 
digital AM technologies, Reverse Engineering 
Post-processing and Inspection techniques [2 lectures]:  Post processing problems and requirements, Rectification  
Student Presentation & Discussi on [2 lectures]: Concept for developing prototype object, Methodology, 
Examining novelty and market acceptability, Translation to business idea  
 
Laboratory Experiments  
NA 
 
Textbooks  
1. Gibson, I., et al (Eds.) (2015), Additive Manufacturing Technology: 3D printing, Rapid Prototyping, and Direct 
Digital Manufacturing, 2nd Ed., Springer   
2. Maniruzzaman, M.. (Ed.), (2019), 3D and 4D Printing in Bio -medical Applications: Process -Engineering and 
Additive Manufacturing, Wiley- VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.  
 
Reference Books  
1.  Declan, M.D.. (2019), Polymer Based Additive Manufacturing- Biomedical Applications, Springer Nature. 
2.  Gu, D., (2015), Laser Additive Manufacture of High-Performance Materials,  Springer Verlag 
41 
 
 
Online Course Material  
1.  Ramkumar, J., 20 18, NOC: Rapid Manufacturing , Department of Mechanical Engineering ; IIT Kanpur,   
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112/104/112104265/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
42 
 
Title Lithium ion batteries Number MTL4XX 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 2-0-2 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type PE 
Prerequisite Thermodynamics   
Objectives  
The theoretical and practical limits of battery technology can be a barrier to meeting some performance 
requirements. Through this course the instructor will provide a thorough insight of development of battery 
materials with future goals to be achieved. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to gain knowledge on: 
1.  Cycling behaviour of the batteries. 
2.  Development of different types of batteries demanding on application, Merits and demerits of each 
batteries. 
3.  Materials developed so far and future goals to be achieved.  
 
Contents  
Introduction: [4 lectures] Components of Li ion electrochemical cells, Operation of a Li ion Cell, Reconstitution 
and Insertion Reactions, Theoretical Cell Voltage, Capacity, and Energy, Cycling Behaviour, Experimental 
Methods to Evaluate the Critical Properties of Electrodes and E lectrolytes, Use of DC and AC Methods to 
Determine the Electronic and Ionic Components of the Conductivity in Solid Electrolytes and Mixed 
Conductors, Influence of Impedances to the Transport of Ionic and Atomic Species within the Cell, Self -
Discharge, Joule Heating to Due to Self-Discharge in Electrochemical Cells. 
Negative Electrodes in Lithium ion Cells: [8 lectures] Elemental Lithium Electrodes, drawbacks, Lithium –
Carbon Alloys, Metallic Lithium Alloys, Mixed -Conductor Matrix Electrodes, Convertible Rea ctant 
Electrodes, Electrochemical Behaviour, structural reversibility, Amorphization, Decrepitation, Modification 
of the Micro and Nanostructure of the Electrode, Electrodes for aqueous systems.  
Positive Electrodes in Lithium ion Cells: [8 lectures] Insertion Reaction, Reconstitution Reaction,  
Electrodes, Materials with Layered Structures, Materials with the Spinel Structure, Materials with the 
Olivine Structure, Liquid Positive Electrode Reactants: The Li/SO 2 System, The Li/SOCl 2 System, 
Electrodes for aqueous systems, Hybrid Ion Cells, The Oxygen Evolution Problem.  
Electrolytes in Lithium ion Cells: [8 lectures] Lithium-Conducting Inorganic Molten Salts,   
Lower Temperature Alkali Halide Molten Salts, Ambient Temperature Organic Solvent Liquid 
Electrolytes/Ionic liquids, Interaction of Organic Solvent Electrolytes with Graphite, Electrolyte Additives, 
Solid Electrolytes, Lithium Ion Conductors: Perovskite and Garnet Structure, Relation Between the Potential 
and the Oxygen Pressure in Lithium Systems, Electrolyte Stability Windows and Their Extension, Two Solid 
Electrolytes in Series, Implications for the Safety of Lithium Cells.  
 
Laboratory Experiments  
1. Introduction to LIBs, different parts of LIB, different size and shapes, applications  
2. Synthesis of graphite and metal-alloys based negative electrodes for LIB 
3. Synthesis of oxide, phosphate and silicate based positive electrodes for LIB  
4. Fabrication of lithium half cells and full cells 
5. Cycle behaviour, charge/discharge characteristics and performance analysis of LIB 
6. Voltammetry study and analysis of electrochemical behaviour through impedance spectroscopy   
7. Exploration of degradation mechanism of oxide and phosphate-based LIBs 
8. Aging and self-discharge characteristics of oxide and phosphate-based LIB 
9. Short-circuit and thermal runaway failure of oxide and phosphate-based LIB 
10. Thermal imaging and calorific study of parasitic reactions 
11. Battery management system, balancing and development of smart charger for LIBs  
 
Textbook  
1. Masaki Yoshio M., Brodd R. J. and Kozawa A. (2010) Lithium-Ion Batteries: Science and Technologies , 
Springer 
2. Toll M. (2017) DIY Lithium Batteries: How to Build Your Own Battery Packs, Toll Publishing  
43 
 
Reference Books  
1.  Huggins R. A. (2009) Advanced Batteries: Materials Science Aspects, 1st Edition, Springer 
2. Linden D. and Reddy T. B. (2002) Handbook of Batteries, 3rd Edition, The McGraw-Hill Companies 
 
Online Course Material  
1. Dr. WALKER W. Q., Short course on lithium-ion batteries: fundamental concepts, heating mechanisms and 
simulation techniques, Nasa Johnson space center, Structural engineering division, Thermal design branch. 
 
2. Prof. Bazant M., MITopencourseware: Electrochemical Energy Systems, MIT Course Number 10.626 / 
10.426, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/chemical-engineering/10-626-electrochemical-energy-systems-
spring-2014/  
 
3. Prof. Maiti H.S., Advanced ceramics for strategic applications, NPTEL, Metallurgy and Mate rials Science, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113/105/113105015/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
44 
 
Title Surface Engineering  Number MTL6XX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech. (MT) Type Program Elective (PE) 
Prerequisite None   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide knowledge on the importance of surface engineering in materials protection and design  
2. Introduce various advanced surface engineering techniques available in the industry  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the basics of various advanced surface engineering techniques  
2. Understand the limitations of standard materials and how they can be improved with surface engineering  
3. Identify the surface treatment best suited to a specific application  
 
Contents 
Fundamentals of surface engineering [10 Lectures]:  definition, scope, classification, and general principles, surface 
dependent properties and failures, Surface and surface energy: Structure and types of interfaces. Protection 
from wear and corrosion by surface engineering. Enhancing the performance of th ermal protection systems, 
biocompatibility, and other functional properties of materials by surface engineering.  
Surface engineering Techniques [24 Lectures]: Surface engineering by energy beams: Laser assisted microstructural 
modification –Laser assisted compositional modification – surface cladding. Electron beam assisted 
modification and joining. Ion beam assisted microstructure and compositional modification. Surface 
engineering by spray techniques: Principle and scope of applications of Flame spraying,  Plasma coating, 
HVOF, cold spray. Characterization of surface microstructure and properties (name of the techniques and brief 
operating principle). Evaporation - Thermal / Electron beam, Sputter deposition of thin films & coatings – DC 
& RF, Sputter depos ition of thin films & coatings –Chemical vapor deposition and PECVD, Plasma and ion 
beam assisted surface modification, Surface modification by Ion implantation and Ion beam mixing.  
Characterization of surfaces  [8 Lectures] : Measurement of coatings thickne ss, porosity & adhesion of surface 
coatings, Measurement of residual stress & stability, Surface microscopy, topography and Spectroscopic 
analysis of modified surfaces. 
 
Textbooks 
1. Davis,J.R, (2001), Surface Engineering for Corrosion and Wear Resistance, ASM International,.  
2. Budinski K., (1990), Surface Engineering for Wear Resistance, Prentice Hall.  
 
Reference Book 
1. Ernest, R., Friction and Wear of Materials, (1995), John Wiley and Sons, New York.  
2. Surface Engineering, (2001) ASM Metals Handbook, Vol. 5, Ohio  
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Kallol, M. and Sandeep. S., Heat Treatment and Surface Hardening – I NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113104074/ 
2. Kaushik P.,  Surface Engineering of Nanomaterials,  NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mechanical and  
Industrial Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113107075/  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
 
Title Synthesis and Processing of Semiconductors 
and 2D materials 
Number MTL3XX0 
Department Metallurgical & Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type Program Compulsory 
(PC) 
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Introduce different synthesis and fabrication techniques used for semiconductor device fabrication.  
2. Introduce different synthesis techniques used for 2D materials  
 
Learning Outcomes  
After completion of the course students will be have a basic understanding of different semiconductor device 
fabrication techniques as well as gain knowledge how to synthesize various 2D materials 
 
Contents  
General Introduction (1 Lecture) 
Semiconductor processing [17 Lectures]: Silicon Wafer Fabrication Physical vapour deposition methods: e-beam,  
pulsed laser and ion beam evaporation, Glow, Discharge and Plasma, Sputtering –mechanisms and yield, DC 
and  
RF sputtering, Chemical vapour deposition: Sol -gel, Spin Coating, Atomic Layer deposition, CVD, PECVD, 
MOCVD,  
solution processing techniques, (printing, spin coating, chemical bath depositions, etc.). Semiconductor  
Integration with Functional oxides and Challenges in fabrication 
2D Materials Processing [Lectures 13]: Different types of 2D materials, Strategies and challenges of 2D materials  
synthesis: micromechanical exfoliation, ultrasonic exfoliation, hydrothermal method, topochemical  
transformation, chemical vapor deposition, Top Down vs Bottom up,  Production of graphene and 2 -d 
materials:  
Comparison of production methods, Scotch-tape method (micromechanical cleavage), Chemical vapour  
deposition, Solution-exfoliation 1 – graphene and other 2-d materials, Solution-exfoliation 2 – graphene oxide,  
Decomposition of silicon carbide, Production of graphene nano-ribbons, Synthesis of hexagonal boron nitride,  
and transition metal dichalcogenides, to new and emerging materials such as black phosphorus, silicene, and  
germanene. 
Lithography and Etching [Lectures 6]: Pattern Formation, Optical Lithography, Resists, Wet Chemical Etching,  
Reactive Ion Etching, Ion implantation doping    
Metallization and Polishing [Lectures 2]                                                                                              
Cleanroom & Contamination [Lectures 3]: Cleanroom standards, Contamination and yield, Environment, safety  
and health                                                                                                                
 
Textbook  
1. Ohring, M., (2002), The materials science of Thin films, 2nd Edition, Academic Press Ltd. 
2. Chopra, K. L., (1969), Thin Film Phenomena, McGraw-Hill Book Company 
 
Reference Books  
1. Editor Gogotsi, Y., (2019), 2D Metal Carbides and Nitrides (MXenes): Structure, Properties and Applications,  
Springer 
2. Shinohara, H., Tiwari, A., (2015), Graphene: an introduction to the fundamentals and industrial applications. 
John Wiley & Sons 
 
Online Course Material  
Parasuraman Swaminathan, Electronic materials, devices and fabrication, NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Metallurgical and Materials Engineering, IIT Madras, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113/106/113106062/ 
 
46 
 
Title Biomaterials Engineering Number BSBE 4XX0 
Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech. (MT) Type Program Elective (PE) 
Prerequisite None   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide an insight on the fundamental concepts of biomaterials engineering.  
2. Give an overview of techniques for characterizations of different types of biomaterials for various 
applications. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to: 
1. Analyze the suitability of the material to be used as a biomaterial.  
2. Compare the performance of different biomaterials. 
3. Design a strategy for modification of biomaterials for a specific application.  
 
Contents 
Fundamental of Biomaterials  [14 Lectures] : Introduction to biomaterials, types of biomaterials, processing of 
biomaterials, surface properties and surface modification of biomaterials, physicochemical characterization of 
biomaterials. (by MM department) 
Biological Properties of Biomaterials  [14 Lectures] : Concepts of biocompatibility, immune -compatibility, 
hemocompatibility and biodegradability, Bioconjugations, Biomineralization, Biological characterization of 
biomaterials (by BSBE) 
Applications of Biomaterials  [14 Lectures]: Biomimetic and stealth biomaterials, types and applications of 
implants, biomaterials for drug delivery systems, biomateri als for tissue engineering, regulatory affairs  (by 
BSBE) 
 
Text Books 
Basu,B., (2017), Biomaterials Science and Tissue Engineering, First edition, Cambridge University Press  
 
Reference Books 
Shelly, E., Elbert, S, Zhang, G., (2020), Biomaterials Science: An Introduction to Materials in Medicine, Edited by 
William R Wagner,  Michael J. Yaszemski, 4th edition, Academic Press Inc. 
 
Self-Learning Material  
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113/104/113104009/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
47 
 
Title Functional Ceramics Number MTL4XX0 
Department Department of Metallurgical and Materials 
Engineering  
L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for BTech/PhD Type PE 
Prerequisite Semiconductor Devices    
Objectives  
The instructor will:  
Provide in-depth knowledge into the electronic, magnetic, and optical properties of ceramic materials systems 
and their properties  
 
Learning Outcomes  
On successful completion of the course, the students would be:   
1. Know the relationships between ceramic structure (electronic, microstructural, and defect structure) and 
the wide variety of properties they display.  
2. Learn how these variety of phenomena can be exploited in useful applications like sensors, and 
piezoelectric transducers  
3. Access Current day research topics on electronic magnetic and optical materials.  
 
Contents   
General Introduction [1 Lecture] 
Crystallography and Bonding [6 Lectures]:  Structures, Bonding in Ceramics Structure formation rules in Oxides, 
Important structures in Oxides. 
Defects [5 Lecture hours]: Defects in ceramics and defect chemistry, Defects diffusion and equilibrium  
Electrical conductivity [5 Lectures]: Conduction Mechanisms in Ceramics, Resistors, varistors and thermistors  
Dielectrics, ferro- and piezo -electrics [16 Lectures]:   Capacitor Materials, Dielectric Breakdown, High and low 
permittivity materials, Microwave and tunable dielectrics, Ferroelectric memories, Piezoelectric materials: 
PZT, BaTiO 3, Morphotropic Phase boundary, Electr ostriction, Pyroelectric material s: Thermal Imaging, IR 
detectio 
Magnetic Ceramics [3 Lectures] : General Properties, Magnetic ferrites, Magneto crystalline anisotropy, 
Magnetostriction, Applications 
Electro-optical Properties [3 Lectures]: Electro-optic effect, Non-Linear optics, Birefringence, PLZT material and 
structure 
Material processing [3 Lectures]: Thin film and Bulk processing  
 
Textbook 
1. Electroceramics: Materials, Properties and Applications by A. J. Moulson and  J. M. Herbert, Chapman and 
Hall, 2nd Edition, 1990. 
2. Kofstad, Per. "Nonstoichiometry, diffusion, and electrical conductivity in binary metal oxides." (1972).  
 
Reference Books  
1.  Introduction to solid State Physics by Charles Kittel, Wiley Eastern, 5th Edition, 1983  
2. Newnham, R. E. (2012). Structure-property relations (Vol. 2). Springer Science & Business Media 
 
Online Course Material  
1. Ashish Garg, Electroceramics, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Material Science & Engineering, 
Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113/104/113104005/ 
2. Ashish Garg, Fundamentals and Applications of Dielectric Ceramics, NPTEL Course Material, Department 
of Material Science & Engineering, I ndian Institute of Technology Kanpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113/104/113104090/ 
 
 
 
 
 
48 
 
Title Magnetism and Magnetic Materials  Number MTL4XX0 
Department  L-T-P [C] (3-0-0) [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type Elective 
Prerequisite Basic knowledge on Quantum Mechanics   
Objectives 
The course will provide knowledge of underlying phenomena of magnetism. Emphasis will be on the 
preparation process & characterisation methods of magnetic materials used for Engineering applications 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability of understanding magnetic phenomena, and metallurgical aspect 
of developing magnetic materials. They will also get an exposure of engineering application of magnetic 
methods and magnetic materials.  
Contents  
Origin of magnetism, Bohr Magnetron, Classification of magnetic materials, Weiss molecular field (4L)  
Magnetism in Metals and Insulators, Exchange Interaction, Magnetic Anisotropy and Magnetostriction, (6L)  
Domain and Domain Walls, Magnetic Hysteresis and Barkhausen Emissions, Techniques for Characterisation 
of Magnetic Materials, Superconductor and Superconducting Magnets, Structure Property Relations (8L),  
Soft Magnetic Materials: Nickel Iron Alloys, Cobalt-Iron alloys, Electrical steel (CRNO, CRGO and 
amorphous), Amorphous & Nanostructured magnetic alloys. (6L) 
Hard Magnetic Materials: Alnico, NdFeB, SmCo (6L) 
Soft & Hard Ferrites, Magnetic Shape Memory and Magnetocaloric Materials (6L),  
Application of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials (2L) 
Text/Reference Book: 
1. Chih-Wen Chen, Magnetism and Metallurgy of Soft magnetic Materials, Dover Publications, INC. New 
York, ISBN 0-486-64997 
2. B.D. Cullity, Introduction to Magnetic Materials, Addison-Wesley publishing company, California, 
London,  
3. D. C. Jiles, Introduction to Magnetism and Magnetic Materials, Chapman & Hill, London, 1991.  
4. (iv) S. Chikazumi, Physics of Ferromagnetism, Oxford University Press 1997, Reprinted in 2002, ISBN: 0 -
19-851776-9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
49 
 
Title Computational Thermodynamics Number MTL6XX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–2 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech (MT) Type Program Elective (PE) 
Prerequisite  
Objectives 
Understanding the correlation between the phase diagram and chemical thermodynamics for alloy design. 
Learning Outcomes 
Ability to construct multicomponent phase diagrams using computational thermodynamic approach.  
 
Contents 
1. Thermodynamics of Solution [7 Lectures]:  Thermochemistry of solutions. Evolution of phase diagrams - 
quasichemical theory, Sub regular solution model.  
2. Calculation of thermodynamic parameters [7 Lectures]:  First principle calculation, Semi -empirical-Miedema 
approach. Calorimetric measurement, electrochemical measurement,  
3. Calculation of multicomponent phase diagram [1 4 Lectures]: Redlitch-kister polynomial, Muggianu and kohler 
extrapolation. Crystallography in thermodynamics, Order and disorder structure, antisite defect and 
vacancies. Compound energy formalism. Modeling of Interstitial and substitutional phases, stoic hiometric 
and non-stoichiometric compounds.  
 
Lab Experiments 
1. Construction of equilibrium and non-equilibrium phase diagram,  
2. Vertical section phase diagram and Property diagram for multi-component alloys,  
3. Scheil and equilibrium solidification simulation,  
4. Liquidus projections and monovariant reactions in ternary phase equilibria,  
5. Creation of user defined thermodynamic database.  
 
Textbooks 
1. Saunders   and   Miodownik, (1998), CALPHAD (Calculation of Phase Diagrams): A Comprehensi ve Guide, 1st 
Edition, Pergamman Press,  
2. Lukas,H., Suzana,G., Fries , B.S., (2007), Computational Thermodynamics: The Calphad Method,  Cambridge 
University Press,  
 
Self-Learning Material 
Porter, D.A., Easterling, K. E., and Sherif, M.Y., (2009), Phase Transformation in Metals and Alloys , 3rd Edition, 
CRC Press  
 
Online Course Materials 
Murty, B.S., Advanced Metallurgical Thermodynamics, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Metallurgical 
and Materials Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113106031/.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
50 
 
Title Mineral Beneficiation Number MTL4XX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type Program Elective (PE) 
Prerequisite -   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Introduce the principles of physical separation methods, simulation, and instrumentation related 
to mineral processing 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Ability to engineer selective mineral processing based on material and environment conditions 
 
Contents 
Introduction to Mineral Geology [2 lectures]: Geological formation of minerals. Classification and identification of 
minerals  
Introduction to Mineral Beneficiation  [4 lectures]:  Mineral Beneficiation Plant, Materials handling, Sampling, 
Sizing of ore particles- sieve analysis and testing, particle size distribution  
Comminution and Screening  [10 lectures]:  Liberalization of dissimilar minerals, Degree of liberalization, 
comminution- fracture, laws of comminution, crushing – Primary and secondary crusher, crushing operation, 
Ginding- Ball milling, Wet and Dry Grinding, Chemical Comminution-leaching, dissolution,  Screening- types, 
factors affecting rate of screening, screening efficiency   
Separation and Concentration of ores  [14 lectures]:  Classification mechanical sorting, Gravity separation or 
concentration- Float and sink, heavy medium separation, Jigging, Flowing film concentration, Froth Floatation- 
floating reagents, types of floatation, Surface properties and selective flotation of ores, floatation for Sulphide 
ores,  flocculation, Magnetic and Electrical Separation  
Solid-Liquid Separation [4 lectures]: Settling of solids in fluids, Solid -Liquid separation-Dewatering, Mechanical 
Dewatering of Slurries and Liquid-Liquid processing methods, Filtering 
Applications and Examples [8 lectures]:  Mineral beneficiation of Zn, Cu, Fe, Pb ores, Heap leaching of Au, 
Mineral Processing of special materials (from brine and mineral resources), rare earths, vanadium, etc. 
 
Textbooks  
1. Wills,B.A. and Napier-Munn,T.J., (2006), Mineral Processing Technology, Elsevier Science & Technology 
Books, 7th Edition  
2. Subbarao,D.V., (2011), Mineral Beneficiation: A Concise Basic Course, CRC Press  
 
Reference Books 
1. Drzymala, J., (2007), Mineral Processing: foundations of theory and practice of minerallurgy, Wroclaw 
University of Technology 
2. German,R.M., (2005), Powder Metallurgy & Particulate Materials Processing, Metal Powder Industry 
 
Online Course Materials 
Majmuder, A., Introduction to Mineral Processing, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mining 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/105105171/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
51 
 
Title Kinetics of Metallurgical Processes Number MTL4XX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type Program Elective 
Prerequisite -   
Objectives  
This course aims to cover:  
Various kinetic aspects of metallurgical processes encountered in during metal extraction  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students will be able to: 
Identify the rate controlling mechanism for a metallurgical process  
 
Contents  
Introduction and Kinetics of Homogeneous Reaction [6 lectures]: Scope of metallurgical kinetics, rate processes, 
rate of reaction, Rate equation, molecularity and order of reactions; reaction mechanism, temperature 
dependence of reaction rate-Arrhenius equation and activation energy 
Interpretation of Batch Reaction Data [8 lectures]: Irreversible first order, second order, and third order reaction, 
zero-order reaction, overall order of reaction from half-life, homogeneous catalyzed reactions, irreversible 
reactions in series, General and first order reversible reactions  
Chemically Controlled Reactions [8 lectures]: Reaction steps and rate controlling step, reaction between a solid 
and a fluid, interfacial reaction control-kinetic law, reduction of Hematite by CO or H2, Examples of leaching 
reaction- Ammonia leaching and acid leaching of Chalcopyrite, Chemisorption, Total internal reaction 
Diffusion through product layer [8 lectures]: Reaction of a flat plate and of a spherical solid, Diffusion through 
porous solid, Example: packed bed, leaching of Sulphide minerals 
Fluid Phase mass transfer [12 lectures]: Mass Transfer Across a Boundary Layer, Mass Transfer at Solid–Fluid 
Interface, Dissolution of a Solid in a Liquid, Electrochemical Mechanism in Leaching, Smelting reduction 
process- reduction of FeO in slag, reaction between two fluids-mass transfer across two fluid interface, slag-
metal reaction, mass-transfer as a rate controlling step  
 
Laboratory Experiments 
NA 
 
Textbook  
1. Ray, H.S., Ray, S.K., (2018), Kinetics of Metallurgical Processes, 1st Edition, Springer 
2. Ghosh, A., Ghosh, S., (2014), Textbook of Metallurgical Kinetics, PHI Learning Private Limited 
 
Reference Books 
1. Levenspiel, O., (2006), Chemical Reaction Engineering, 3rd Edition, John Wiley and Sons. 
2. Wilkinson, D.S., (2000), Mass Transport in Solids and Fluids, Cambridge Univeristy Press 
 
Online Course Material  
Prof. B. Mandal, Chemical Reaction Engineering-I, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Chemical 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/103/103103153/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
52 
 
Title Principles of Process Metallurgy Number MT4XX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type Program Elective (PE) 
Prerequisite None   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce methods for the calculation of mass and energy balance for various metal extraction processes  
2. Expose the students to various process control and transport phenomena for various metal extraction 
processes  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply the principles of thermodynamics and transport phenomena to understand  and control 
metallurgical processes 
2. Relate the basic phenomena and process output through mass and energy calculations  
 
Contents 
Metal-slag interactions  [6 Lectures]:  Thermo-physical properties of metals and slags, slag -metal equilibrium 
calculations, application of slag capacity during metal refining 
Process phenomena [6 Lectures]:   bubble formation, foaming, gas -liquid reactions, reactions between liquid 
phases 
Process control in metallurgical processes  [6 Lectures]: Iron making, converter steel making, electric arc furnace, 
secondary steel making 
Mass and Energy balance in Iron and Steel Making [8 Lectures]:  Materials Balance in Iron making, Blast furnace 
stoichiometry, Enthalpy balance in blast furnace. Material and heat balance in converting. Material and heat 
balance in steel making by L.D converters and open-hearth furnace.  
Mass and energy balance in cal cination and roasting [8 Lectures]:  Calcination - Principles of calcination, Materials 
and heat balance in calcinations. Roasting - Introduction, Sources of energy, Determination of calorific value 
of gaseous fuel, Amount of air, Materials balance calculat ion in roasting. Basics of heat balance in roasting. 
Calculation Procedure for Roasting Temperature.  
Mass and energy balance in non-ferrous smelting [8 Lectures] Matte smelting, Industrial copper smelting. Material 
balance and heat balance problems in mat te smelting. Reduction smelting, Material balance in zinc and lead 
smelting, Material and heat balance in Imperial Smelting Process.  
 
Textbooks 
1. Sano N., Lu W., Riboud P., (1997), Advanced Physical Chemistry for Process Metallurgy, Academic Press,  
2. Shamsuddin M., (2016), Physical Chemistry of Metallurgical Processes, John Wiley & Sons.  
3. Alan Fine H, Gordon H. Geiger, (1998),  Handbook on Material and Energy Balance Calculations in Metallurgical 
Processes, 2nd Revised Edition, Wiley. 
 
Self-Learning Materials 
Ray, H.S., and Ghosh, A., (1991), Principles of extractive metallurgy, Wiley Eastern Ltd., New Delhi  
 
Online Course Materials 
1. Muzumdar, D., and Koria, S.C., Steel Making, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Material Science 
and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113104013/ 
2. Ray, H.S., Non -ferrous Extractive Metallurgy, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Materials and 
Metallurgical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113/105/113105021/ 
 
 
 
 
53 
 
Title Hydrometallurgy Number MTL4XX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type Program Elective (PE) 
Prerequisite -   
Objectives  
This course aims to cover:  
1. Thermodynamic and kinetic aspects of leaching as a hydrometallurgical technique of metal extraction  
2. Purification of leach liquors by ion exchange, solvent extraction, adsorption using active carbon, selective 
precipitation operations, and solid-liquid separation techniques.  
3. Several practical leaching processes for nonferrous metal extraction and processing.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students will be able to: 
1. Understand the thermodynamics and kinetics of leaching and how it impacts the design of a 
hydrometallurgical process. 
2. Discuss the concepts and design of separation and purification of leach liquors including solvent 
extraction; ion exchange; precipitation; crystallisation; and membrane treatment.  
3. Explain the concepts and design of metal recovery processes  
 
Contents  
Introduction and Chemical fundamentals of hydrometallurgy [8 lectures]: Mineral Deposition, lean ore, Aqueous 
Processing and Utilization of Metals, Chemical Potential, Equilibrium, Solubility Product, Relationships 
Amongst K, pK, pKa, and pH 
Speciation and phase diagram [8 lectures]: Speciation (Ion Distribution) Diagrams, Metal-Ligand Speciation 
Diagrams, Phase Stability Diagrams 
Rate processes [14 lectures]: Chemical/Electrochemical/Biochemical Reaction Kinetics, Reaction Kin etics, Mass 
Transport, Combined Mass Transport and Reaction Kinetics, Models for Reactions Involving Particles, 
Crystallization Kinetics 
Metal extraction: [12 lectures]: Separation of dissolved metals, metal recovery processes, metal utilization  
 
Laboratory Experiments 
NA 
 
Textbook  
Free,M.L., (2013) Hydrometallurgy: Fundamentals and Applications, 1st Edition, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 
Hoboken, New Jersey 
 
Reference Books 
Havlik, T., (2008) Hydrometallurgy: Principles and Applications, CRC Press Woodhead  Publishing 
 
Online Course Material  
Prof. H.S. Ray, Non-ferrous Extractive Metallurgy, NPTEL Course Material, Metallurgy & Material Science, 
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113105021/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
54 
 
Title Electrometallurgy Number MTL4XX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. (MT) Type Program Elective (PE) 
Prerequisite -   
Objectives  
The aims to cover  
1. The principles and applications of aqueous electrochemistry in extractive metallurgy.  
2. Analysis of the thermodynamic and electro -chemical kinetic phenomena in aqueous and non -aqueous 
electrowinning and electrorefining of metals.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The student should be able to: 
1. Have knowledge and understanding of the existing electrometallurgical processes,  
2. Analyze, conceive and conceptually design novel electrometallurgical processes  
 
Contents  
Introduction, Definitions, Principles and Concepts [8 lectures]:  Electrodes and electrochemical reactions, cell and 
circuit, The Nernst equation and energy producing cells, Electrolysis, Faraday’s law, Electro -crystallization. 
 
Surface Morphology of Metal Electrodeposits [10 lectures]:  Thin Compac t Surface Metal Films, Thick Compact 
Metal Electrodeposits, Nucleation rate and deposition overpotential, Deposition from simple/ complex salt 
solutions with/without the presence of adsorbed additives, Disperse (Spongy, Dendritic, Powdered, Granular, 
Whisker) Deposits. 
 
The Current Distribution in Electrochemical Cells [10 lectures]:  Two equal plane parallel electrodes arrangement, 
Ohmic resistance of the cell, The  edge effect, Cell voltage-current density dependencies, Determination of the 
current density distribution, Cells with Low Anode Polarisation, Corner Weakness Phenomena in 
Electroforming, Electrodeposition at a periodically changing rate. 
 
Applications [14 lectures]: Electrowinning (zinc and aluminium), Electrorefining (copper), Optimum conditions 
for electroplating (metals/alloys/composites) from aqueous/non -aqueous/molten salt solutions, 
Electropolishing, Electro-machining, Electrochemical Oxidation of Metals. 
 
Laboratory Experiments 
NA 
 
Textbook  
Popov K. I., Djokic S. S. and Grgur B. N. (2002) Fundamental aspects of electrometallurgy , Kluwer academic 
publishers, New York. 
 
Reference Books  
Free M., Moats M., Houlachi G., Asselin E., Allanore A., Yurko  J., Wang S (2012) Electrometallurgy 2012, John 
Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey. 
 
Online Course Material 
Prof. H.S. Ray, Non-ferrous Extractive Metallurgy, NPTEL Course Material, Metallurgy & Material Science, 
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113105021/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
55 
 
Title Secondary and Special Steel Making  Number MTL6XX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech. (MT) Type Program Elective (PE) 
Prerequisite -   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide knowledge on various secondary steel making process 
 
Learning Outcomes 
Expose students to advanced methods of making super clean steel  
 
Contents 
Melt cleanliness and Degassing  [14 Lectures] : The concept of cleanliness of steels, non -metallic inclusions, 
dissolved gases. Tramp & residual elements in steels and their effect on steel properties. Transport Phenomena 
during taping of Liquid Steel - Estimation of Gas absorption during tapping. Importance of Slag free tapping. 
Thermodynamic and kinetics of degassing of steel melts. Operation of degassing reactors viz. DH, RH, tank 
degassers etc., Re-melting refining technologies. Vacuum Degassing process. 
 
Ladle Metallurgy [14 Lectures] : Thermodynamics & Kinetics of Deoxidation. Types & selection of Deoxidizers, 
Metallurgical & Thermodynamic conditions for Good Desulphurization and synthetic slag. Wire Injection 
Techniques for increased efficiency of Deoxidation &Desulphurization. Limitations of primary steel making, 
unit operations and unit processes in ladle metallurgy. Ladle furnaces design and operation, injection 
metallurgy.  
 
Casting and Special steel making process [14 Lectures] :  Ingot casting of steel, Segregation, Ingot Defects. 
Continuous Casting: Heat Transfer and Solidification, bloom, Billet, Slab and Thin strip Caster, primary and 
Secondary Cooling, Process parameters of the caster. Special steel making processes viz. AOD, V OD 
continuous steel making etc. Principles of Electroslag remelting (ESR) & Vacuum Arc Remelting (VAR). 
Advantages over traditional Secondary Steel Making vs Costs involved.  
 
Text Books 
Ghosh, A., (2000), Secondary Steel Making: Principles & Applications, First edition, CRC Press.  
 
Reference Books 
1. Ghosh, A., Chatterjee, A., (2012), Iron and Steel Making – Theory & Practice, PHI Leasing Private Ltd. 
2. Mazumdar, D., (2015), A First Course in Iron and Steel Making, Universities Press(India) Pvt. Ltd. 
 
Self-Learning Material  
Mazumdar. D  and Koria S.C., Steel Making, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Metallurgical 
Engineering and Materials Science, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur,  
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113104059/ 
 