Source: http://intra.iitj.ac.in/acad_website/pg_curriculum/CHEMISTRY_06092019.pdf
================================================================================

 
 
 
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur 
 
   
 
 
 
 
PG Course Booklet 
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur 
July 2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 yr M.Sc. Chemistry  
 
Curriculum Structure 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
3 
 
Introduction to the Program 
Chemistry involves the study of substances, their properties, structures, reactions and 
transformations. Chemistry is interlinked with various scientific disciplines and play an 
important role in our daily life. It broadly covers various areas including me dicinal 
chemistry, analytical chemistry, organometallic chemistry, polymer chemistry, quantum 
chemistry, catalysis and many aspects of materials science. In the modern society, 
knowledge of Chemistry is essential for addressing most of the real -life challenges related 
to water, energy, food, agriculture, security and healthcare.   
 
Objectives of the Program 
The major objective of the program is to bring out professionals having fundamental 
knowledge, and specific skill sets of various aspects of chemi stry such as Organic 
Reactions and their Mechanism, Main -Group and Transition Metals, Organometallics and 
Catalysis, Physical and Spectroscopic techniques, Inorganic and Solid State Material 
synthesis, Computational and Theoretical Chemistry.  
The depart ment focuses on preparing future students to take up challenges at various 
levels of academics, R&Ds and industries. 
 
Expected Graduate Attributes 
(1) Capability to appreciate synthetic methods for development of important chemical 
products such as pharm aceutical drugs, paints, petrochemicals, food additives, plastics 
etc.  
(2) Ability to use characterization tools for analysing reactions and monitoring chemical 
processes for product development.  
(3) Ability to handle analytical, spectroscopic, microscopic and other instrumental 
methods for interdisciplinary research areas. 
(4) Use of computational tools to understand and analyse chemical and biophysical 
processes, molecular structures and advanced materials. 
(5) Ability to comprehend, write and present scientific articles and technical reports. 
(6) Develop oral and written communication skills. 
(7) Appreciation and adherence to norms of professional ethics and sense of intellectual 
integrity.  
(8) Ability to plan and manage technical research projects and work in a team. 
 
Program Learning outcome 
 
(1) Strong fundamentals in theoretical and practical aspects of organic, inorganic and 
physical chemistry.  
(2) Develop appreciation of hands -on wet chemistry, analytical, instrumentation, and 
experimental data handling skills to solve scientific problems to address technological 
challenges in various domains.  
(3) Knowledge of computational and theoretical chemistry. 
(4) Skills for material synthesis and processes for device integration 
(5) Develop the ability to exercise independent learning, thinking and problem solving 
skills. 
(6) Develop the ability to interact in a cross-cultural environment and acquire time and 
project management skills for carrying out guided research work in any of the research 
area related to science and technology.  
(7) Develop skills to communicate scientific learning and present ideas. 
 
 
Course Curriculum Structure 
4 
 
 
Cat. 
Course Number, 
Course Title 
L-T-P-D Credit
s 
 Cat. Course Number, 
Course Title 
L-T-P-
D 
Credit
s 
I Semester  II Semester 
MC  CYL6XX0 Organic 
Reactions and 
Mechanisms  
3-0-0-0  3   MC  CYL6XX0 Organic 
Synthesis 
3-0-0-
0  
3  
MC  CYL6XX0Transition 
Metal and 
Organometallic 
Chemistry  
3-0-0-0  3   MC  CYL6XX0 Solid State 
and Material Chemistry  
3-0-0-
0  
3  
MC  CYL6XX0 Quantum 
Chemistry and 
Spectroscopy  
3-0-0-0  3   MC  CYL6XX0 Molecular 
 Thermodynamics and   
Chemical Kinetics  
3-0-0-
0  
3  
MC  CYL6XX0 Physical 
Organic Chemistry  
3-0-0-0  3   MC  CYL6XX0 Theory and 
Applications of 
spectroscopic 
techniques  
3-0-0-
0  
3  
 
MC  CYL6XX0 Main Group 
and Bioinorganic 
Chemistry 
3-0-0-0  3   ME   Program elective-1  3-0-0-
0  
3  
MC  CYP6XX0Organic 
Laboratory  
0-0-3-0  1.5   MC  CYP6XX0 Physical   
Laboratory  
0-0-3-
0  
1.5  
MC  CYP6XX0 Inorganic 
Chemistry Laboratory  
0-0-3-0  1.5   MC  CYD6XX0 Minor 
Project  
 0-0-3-
0  
 1.5  
MC  CYP6XX0 Hands on -1  0-0-3-0  1.5   MC  CYP6XX0  Hands on-2 0-0-3-
0  
 
1.5  
 
Total 19.5  Total 19.5 
 
III Semester  IV Semester 
MO  Open elective-1  3-0-0-0  3   ME  Program Elective-5  3-0-0-0  3  
ME  Program Elective-2  3-0-0-0  3   ME  Program Elective-6  3-0-0-0  3  
ME  Program Elective-3  0-0-3-0  3   MO Open Elective -2  3-0-0-0  3  
ME  Program Elective-4  3-0-0-0  3   MP  CYD7XX0:Project  0-0-0-
10  
10  
MC  CYP6XX0:Computatio
nal Lab  
0-0-1-0  1.5       
MP  CYD7XX0 Project  0-0-0-5  5       
MC CYQ6XX0 Seminar  0-0-1-0  0.5       
Total 19  Total 19 
* Open Elective Courses can be taken in the third semester as well 
 
Total Credits: 77 
 
 
 
 
 
Topic Clouds for MSc Chemistry Curriculum 
5 
 
A. PHYSICAL CHEMISTRY 
       Topics  Sub-Topic Clouds  
Quantum 
Chemistry  
Principles, Exactly solved problems, Approximation 
Methods, Electronic Structure Methods, Group Theory. 
Chemical Kinetics 
and 
Thermodynamics  
Molecular Thermodynamics, Chemical Kinetics, Catalysis, 
Chemical Reaction Dynamics, Reaction Kinetics of special 
reactions.  
Spectroscopy  Fundamentals of Spectroscopic techniques and associated 
applications, Principles of NMR, Analytical Methods.  
Electrochemistry  Basics of Electrochemistry, DC and AC techniques, 
Photoelectrochemistry, Redox Reactions, Semiconductor 
Solution interfaces, Electrochemical Sensors, Electro-
transfer systems, Solar cells, Electrochemical Energy 
Storage Devices, Fuel cell.  
 Statistical 
Mechanics  
Molecular simulation, Polymer dynamics, Statistical 
mechanics, Stochastic problems in biophysics.  
Hands on and 
Experimental 
Laboratory  
Analytical Methods: UV-Vis, Fluorescence, FTIR etc. 
Electroanalytical methods (CV, EIS, GCD, 
Chronopotentiometry, Ampereometric and steady state 
techniques), Surface and Interface Chemistry: contact 
angle, surface tension, surface free energy, 
conductometric titrations.  
 
B. ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
Topics Sub-Topic Clouds 
Organic Synthesis and 
Catalysis  
Organic Reactions Mechanism and 
Rearrangements, Organic methods, Pericyclic 
reactions, Organic Photochemistry, Spectroscopy of 
Organic Compounds, Enolate chemistry, Radical 
Chemistry, catalysis in organic chemistry, 
Microwave Reactions, Heterocyclic Chemistry, 
Green Chemistry.  
Asymmetric Synthesis  Basics of Stereochemistry, Stereochemistry of 
Organic Compounds, Enantioselective Synthesis, 
Transition State Models and Reaction Outcome.  
Medicinal Chemistry and 
Drug Discovery  
Fundamentals of Medicinal Chemistry, PK and PD, 
ADME-TOX, Lipinski‟s Rule, Basics of Drug 
Discovery, Heterocyclic compounds as leads, 
clinical trials  
6 
 
Natural Products Retrosynthetic Analysis, Natural Product Isolation, 
Total Synthesis of Natural Products 
Laboratory and Hand-
on 
Synthesis Protocols, Purification and Distillation 
Techniques,  Chromatography Structural 
Determination of Organic compounds  
 
C. INORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
Topic Cloud Sub-Topic Clouds 
Transition Metal, 
Coordination 
chemistry, and 
Organometallics  
General consideration of d block elements, 
Coordination complexes: Structure, Bonding and 
Properties, Reaction Mechanism. Molecular Complexes, 
Coordination polymers and their properties. 
Organometallic complexes: synthesis, reactivity and 
catalytic applications. 
Solid -State Materials 
Chemistry  
Crystal Structures, X-Ray Diffraction Techniques, 
Synthesis and Physical Characterization of Materials, 
Bonding in Solids and properties,  Compound 
semiconductors, molecular magnets and magnetic 
properties, Defects and Non-stoichiometry, 
Nanomaterials with low-dimensional properties.  
Main Group Chemistry 
and Bioinorganic 
Chemistry  
Basic Concept: Periodic Trends, Atoms, Molecules. 
Structure, Bonding and Reactivity of polyatomic 
molecules. Synthesis and properties of compounds of 
s- and p-block elements. 
Metal ions in biological systems and Medicine, Iron 
storage and Transport, Oxygen transport, Biological 
Redox processes, Metallo-Enzymes.  
Catalysis  Catalysis: Introductory Concept, Homogeneous and 
Heterogeneous Catalysis: Industrially important 
reactions, catalytic concept of energy and 
environmental  
Environmental 
Chemistry  
Environmental Remediation, Soil Chemistry, Water 
Chemistry, Chemical Sensors, Analytical Chemistry  
Laboratory and Hands-
on  
Synthesis Techniques for complexes and solids, 
Characterization methods, spectroscopic and analytical 
techniques  
 
 
 
Contents 
 
7 
 
 Index 
1 Organic Chemistry Core Courses and Laboratory 
1. Organic Reactions and Mechanism 
2. Physical organic Chemistry 
3. Organic Synthesis 
4. Organic Chemistry Laboratory 
2 Organic Chemistry Elective Courses 
1. Isolation and Synthesis of Natural Products 
2. Spectroscopic Determination of Organic Compounds 
3. Stereochemistry of Organic Compounds 
4. Frontiers in Organic Chemistry 
5. Heterocyclic Chemistry 
6. Polymer Chemistry 
3 Inorganic Chemistry Core Courses and Laboratory 
1. Main Group and Bioinorganic Chemistry 
2. Transition Metal and Organometallic Chemistry 
3. Solid State and Material Chemistry 
4. Inorganic Chemistry Laboratory 
4 Inorganic Chemistry Elective Courses 
1. Catalysis of Energy 
2. Nanomaterials and Nanodevices 
3. Compounds of p-block Elements and Applications 
4. Advanced Materials Design 
5. Characterization Techniques in Inorganic Chemistry 
6. Advanced Catalysis 
7. Water Chemistry 
8. Sustainable Catalytic Systems 
9. Frontiers in Organometallic Catalysis 
5 Physical Chemistry Core Courses and Laboratory 
1. Quantum Chemistry and Spectroscopy 
2. Molecular Thermodynamics and Chemical Kinetics 
3. Theory and Applications of Spectroscopic Techniques 
4. Physical Chemistry Laboratory 
5. Computational Chemistry Laboratory 
6 Physical Chemistry Elective Courses 
1. Numerical Methods and Group Theory 
2. Chemical Binding 
3. Principles of Nuclear Magnetic Resonance 
4. Molecular Dynamics Simulations 
5. Solid State NMR Methods for Materials 
6. Group Theory and Molecular Spectroscopy 
7. Modern Electronic Structure Theory 
8. Chemical Reaction Dynamics 
9. Biophysical Techniques: Theory and Applications 
10.Stochastic problems in Biophysics 
11.Polymer Dynamics 
12.Statistical Mechanics and Molecular Simulations 
13.Advanced Electrochemistry and Applications 
7 Hands on-1 
Hands on-2 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Organic Chemistry 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
Title Organic Reactions and Mechanisms  Number CYL6XX0 
9 
 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The instructor will: 
1. To give students a better insight into the mechanism of diverse set of organic reactions 
2. To broaden their knowledge in fundamental organic chemistry with regard to efficiency 
and selectivity of organic reactions. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. The students are expected to be able to draw mechanisms for complex reactions 
2. Understand and predict the orbital interactions involved in organic reactions  
 
Contents  
Introduction: reaction mechanism and its need, methods of determination of reaction 
mechanism, concerted versus stepwise processes, transition states and intermediates, 
early and late transition states, crossover experiments and examples, molecular orbital 
interaction of common functional groups (7 lectures) 
Acids and bases: the pKa scale and its interpretation, pKa‟s of common acids; specific and 
general acid and base catalysis (3 lectures) 
Classification of reactions: introduction to substitution, elimination and addition reactions, 
aromaticity and aromatic substitution reactions (9 lectures) 
Stereochemistry: basics of Stereochemistry, stereochem istry of aliphatic compounds, 
conformational analysis of acyclic and cyclic compounds, (6 lectures)  
Selectivity: chemoselectivity, regioselctivity, and stereoselectivity (4 lectures) 
Radical Chemistry : Basics of radicals, radical initiators, radical h alogenation of alkanes, 
radical name reactions (6 lectures) 
Rearrangements and migrations: cationic rearrangements, carbanionic rearrangements, 
carbene/carbenoid based rearrangements (7 lectures) 
 
Textbooks  
1. Sykes,P., (2013), A Guidebook to Mechanism in Organic Chemistry, 6th Edition, 
Longman 
2. Clayden,J., Greeves,N., and Warren,S., (2012), Organic Chemistry, 2nd Edition, Oxford 
3. Carey,F.A., and Sundberg,R.J., (2007) Advanced Organic Chemistry, Part A: Structure 
and Mechanisms, 4th Edition, Plenum 
 
Reference Books  
1. Gossman,R.B., (2008), The Art of Writing Reasonable Organic Reaction Mechanism, 
Springer 
 
Self Learning Material  
1.Sunoj,R.B., Organic Reaction Mechanism, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104101005/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Title Physical Organic Chemistry Number  CYL6XX0 
10 
 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite     
 
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. To provide physical concepts of organic chemistry  
2. To provide knowledge in pericyclic and photochemical reactions  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Be able to understand the course of organic reactions with regard to physical concepts 
and stereochemical models 
2. Develop an in-depth knowledge with mechanistic understanding in pericyclic and 
photochemical reactions and apply those in the synthesis of organic compounds 
 
Contents 
Introduction: Brief review of basic concepts of inductive effect, Electromeric effect, 
Resonance effect, Hyperconjugation, Captodative Effect (4 lectures) 
Stereoelectronic Effects: Participation of sigma and pi bonds in transition state, Orbital 
symmetry and frontier orbitals, , Hammond‟s Postulate, Hammette Plot, Curtin–Hammett 
principle (6 lectures) 
Stereochemical Models: Cram Model, Felkin-Anh Model, Chelation Model, Zimmerman-
Traxler Model (7 lectures) 
Pericyclic Reactions: Introduction of pericyclic reactions, Classifications, Cycloaddition, 
Electrocyclic, Sigmatropic, Group transfer reactions(15 lectures) 
Photochemistry: Basic principles of photochemistry, Photochemical reaction of cyclic and 
acyclic carbonyl compounds including enones and dienones, photochemistry of alkenes, 
dienes, aromatic compounds (10 lectures) 
 
Textbooks  
1. Anslyn, E. V. and Dougherty, D. A., (2006),Modern Physical Organic Chemistry, 
University Science Books 
2. Singh, J. and Singh, J., (2012), Photochemistry and Pericyclic Reactions, 3rd Edition. 
New Age  
 
Reference Books 
1. Smith, M. B., (2016), March‟s Advanced Organic Chemistry, 7th Edition. Wiley  
2. Carey, F. A. and Sundberg, R. J., (2007), Advanced Organic Chemistry Part A: 
Structure and Mechanisms, 5th Edition. Springer 
3. Carey, F. A. and Sundberg, R. J. (2007), Advanced Organic Chemistry Part B: Reactions 
and Synthesis, 5th Edition. Springer 
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Singh, N.D. P., Organic Chemistry and Pericyclic Reactions, NPTEL Course material, 
Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, 
http://www.nptel.ac.in/courses/ 104105071/ 
 
 
 
 
 
Title Organic Synthesis Number CYL6XX0 
11 
 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The instructor will: 
1. To provide an understanding of diverse chemical reactions and their application in 
synthesis 
2. To provide knowledge of key aspects of retrosynthesis of simple-to-complex organic 
molecules. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
1. Acquire the knowledge and skills required to strategize and plan organic synthesis,   
2. Develop an understanding of total synthesis of organic molecules.  
 
Contents  
Introduction: name reactions, functional group interconversions, transition metal 
catalyzed cross-coupling reactions, oxidations and reductions in organic synthesis (25 
lectures) 
Carbon-carbon bond formation: application of carbanions in organic synthesis, alkylation 
of enolates, enamines and hydrazones, alkylation of heteroatom stabilized anions, 
organometallic reagents and their application in synthesis (7 lectures) 
Strategy and design of organic synthesis: scope and brief history of organic synthesis, 
synthetic strategy, concepts of synthetic equivalents and Umpolung, retrosynthetic 
analysis, linear and convergent synthesis, synthesis of 3-membered, 4-membered, 5 
membered and 6-membered ring compounds (10 lectures) 
 
Text books  
1. Warren,S., and Wyatt.P., (2008), Organic Synthesis: The Disconnection Approach, 2nd 
Edition, Wiley-VCH 
2.  Nicolaou,K.C., Sorensen,E.J., (1996), Classics in Total Synthesis: Targets, Strategies 
and Methods, 1st Edition, Wiley-VCH 
3.  Carey,F.A., Sundberg,R.J., (2007), Advanced Organic Chemistry, Part B: Reactions and 
Synthesis, 5th Edition, Plenum 
 
Reference Books  
1. Clayden,J., Greeves,N., and Warren,S., (2012) Organic Chemistry, 2nd Ed., Oxford 
2. Carruthers, W., (1989), Some Modern Methods in Organic Synthesis, Cambridge  
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Punniyamurthy,T., Principles of Organic Synthesis, NPTEL Course Material, Department 
of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati,  
http://www.nptel.ac.in/courses/104103022/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 Title 
Organic Chemistry Laboratory Number CYP6XX0 
12 
 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 0–0–3[1.5] 
Offered for  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The instructor will: 
1. Give students a practical understanding of the theoretical phenomenons. 
2. Provide an exposure to the laboratory techniques for the purification and isolation of organic 
compounds 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
1. Learn basic experimental techniques in organic chemistry 
2. Be able to carry out simple synthetic organic transformations and isolate the reaction 
products  
 
Contents  
Extraction: separation of an acidic, a basic and a neutral substance 
Thin Layer Chromatography (TLC): extraction and TLC of spinach pigments  
Hands on Reactions and Purifications by Column Chromatography: Wittig olefination, Henry 
reaction (Nitro-Aldol reaction), Grignard reaction etc. 
Distillation: Separation of compounds based on boiling point 
Elimination Reaction: Dehydration of methylcyclohexanols to methylcyclohexene 
Cycloaddition: The Diels-Alder reaction of a conjugated diene either in eucalyptus oil or other 
dienophiles 
Aromatic Substitution: The Friedel-Crafts acylation of ferrocene 
Functional Group Interconversion: Reduction and oxidation of organic compounds 
Drug Synthesis: Synthesis of Aspirin from Salicylic Acid 
Green Chemistry: A Solvent-Free Aldol Condensation  
 
Textbook  
1. Vogel, A. I., Textbook of Practical Organic Chemistry, Pearson 
 
Reference Books  
1. Ault, A., Techniques and Experiments for Organic Chemistry, University Science Books 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electives in Organic 
Chemistry 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
14 
 
 
Title Isolation and Synthesis of Natural Products Number CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. Give students a brief history of natural products, their isolation and synthetic studies.  
2. Students will learn about multiple synthetic approaches to natural products including 
synthetic drugs. 
3. Students should understand the complete process of total synthesis of natural products and 
effort required to this end. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Understand advanced retrosynthetic principles (e.g. key disconnection, chiral pool starting 
materials, reactive functional group) and apply in the synthesis including stereochemical 
aspects  
2. Understand key principles behind enantio- and diastereoselectivity, and develop skills to 
predict and interpret stereochemical outcome of reactions. 
3. Learn method development and their application in the total synthesis of natural products in 
an economical way. 
 
Contents 
Introduction: Types of natural products - classification - terpenoids, steroids, alkaloids, natural 
pigments, carbohydrates etc. (3 lectures) 
Isolation: Isolation technique with examples and preliminary identification of natural products. 
(2 lectures) 
Retrosynthesis and synthetic routes: Logical retrosynthetic disconnection, method 
developments and applications in the total synthesis of natural products. (8 lectures) 
Recapitulation of stereochemical concepts: stereoselective and stereospecific reactions, 
prochirality, Chemo-, regio-, diastereo- and enantio-controlled approaches; chirality transfer, 
asymmetric inductions; chiral pools, chiral auxiliaries, chiral catalysts. (6 lectures) 
Terpenoids : Classification, structure, chemistry and biogenesis; Steroids : Sterols and bile 
acids, estrogens, androgens, gestogens and adrenocortical hormones; Alkaloids (5 lectures) 
Characteristic reactions, general methods of degradation, structure and chemistry of some 
well-known alkaloids; Natural Pigments: Flavones, flavanones, isoflavones, xanthones, 
quinones, pterins, chlorophyll and haemin; and Carbohydrates. (8 lectures) 
Synthesis of biologically active Natural products: Strychnine (Overmann Syn.), Fredrikamycin 
A(Norman and Coxan), Cephalosporin (Woodward), Estrone, Mifepristone (Vollard), Taxol, 
Tubulysin, Epothilone, Structure determination of Natural products: Arteannuin B, Hardwickiic 
acid, and Ajmaline, stereoselective synthesis of Ibuprofen, crixivan, propranol. (10 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1.Ernest L. Eliel., (1982), Asymmetric Reactions and Processes in Chemistry 
2.Iwao Ojima., (1993), Catalytic Asymmetric Synthesis: 2nd Ed. 
3.J. Clayden, N. Greeves, S. Warren and P. Wothers., (2012), Organic Chemistry 
Reference Books  
1. S. W. Pelletier., (1970), Chemistry of the Alkaloids 
2. C. W.Shoppee., (1964), Chemistry of the Steroids, 2nd edition 
3.K. Nakanishi, T. Goto, S.Ito, S. Najori and S. Nozoe., (1974), Natural products Chemistry, 
Vol. 1 and 2, Academic Press 
Self Learning Material  
1.http://www.wou.edu/chemistry/courses/online-chemistry-textbooks/ch105-consumer-
chemistry/ch105-chapter-6-hydrocarbons/ 
 
  
15 
 
 
Title Spectroscopic Determination of 
Organic Compounds 
Course No. CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry Structure (L-T-P-C) 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Sc./PhD (CY) Program Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. To teach basic aspects of spectroscopic methods, important analytical tools in academic 
research, chemical and pharmaceutical industries for structural characterization of organic 
molecules. 
2. Elucidation of structures of organic compounds using in-depth analysis of different 
spectroscopic data. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Ability to determine the structures of known/unknown organic molecules utilizing several 
spectroscopic techniques mentioned in the content. 
 
Contents 
Infrared Spectroscopy: Introduction to IR spectroscopy, Modes of stretching and bending, 
stretching frequencies of different organic functional groups, Effects of structural and 
conformational environment (3 lectures) 
Mass Spectrometry: Principles of mass spectrometry, Different ionization techniques (EI, CI, ESI 
etc.), GC-MS, HRMS, LC-MS and MS-MS techniques, Fragmentation and rearrangement of 
different classes of organic molecules, Isotope effects, Identification of known/unknown organic 
compounds (6 lectures) 
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy: Chemical shifts of different organic functional 
groups in 1H and 13C NMR, origin and interpretation of coupling constant, introduction to the 
principle and interpretation of DEPT, COSY, NOESY, NOE techniques, Structural elucidation of 
organic compounds (15 lectures) 
Ultraviolet-Visible Spectroscopy: Studies on conjugated and extended conjugated systems, 
analysis and interpretation of UV-Visible spectroscopic data, Application in mechanistic studies 
(3 lectures) 
Identification and Mechanistic Studies: Application of all above techniques in the structural 
elucidation of unknown organic compounds and investigation of organic reaction mechanisms 
(15 lectures)  
 
Text Books 
1. Donald L. Pavia, Gary M. Lampman, George S. Kriz, James A. Vyvyan: Introduction to 
Spectroscopy, 4th Edition, Brookes Cole, 2008. 
2. Robert M. Silverstein, Francis X. Webster, David Kiemle: Spectrometric identification of 
organic compounds, 7th Edition, Wiley, 2005. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Harald Gunther: NMR spectroscopy, Basic principles, concepts, and applications in 
chemistry, 2nd Ed., Wiley, 2001 (reprint) 
2. Timothy Claridge: High Resolution NMR Techniques in Organic Chemistry, 2nd Ed. Elsevier, 
2009 
3. Edmond de Hoffmann, Vincent Stroobant: Mass Spectrometry, Principles and applications, 
3rd Edition, Wiley, 2007 
 
Self Learning Material  
1. http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104103071/26 
 
 
 
16 
 
Title Stereochemistry of Organic Compounds Number CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for MSc/PhD (CY) Program Type Elective 
Prerequisite     
 
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. Provide understanding of representing stereochemical structures of organic molecules.  
2. Provide knowledge of designing synthetic routes to compounds containing one or more 
stereogenic centers and enantioselective syntheses.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand stereochemical nomenclature, classification of objects with regard to 
symmetry, desymmetrizations, stereochemical discrimination, separation of 
stereoisomers, and principles for stereoselective synthesis  
2. Learn about the key aspects of modern asymmetric synthesis, especially the origin of 
stereoselectivity and to be able to draw plausible TS to predict enantiofacial selectivity.  
 
Contents  
Introduction: Configuration, conformation, determination of structure, symmetry elements, 
Newman, Saw Horse, Zig-Zag and Fischer Projections, absolute stereochemistry (10 
lectures)  
Properties of Stereoisomers: Stereoisomer discrimination, nature of racemates, properties of 
racemates and their enantiomer components (3 lectures) 
Separation of Stereoisomers: Resolution, Crystallization, Chemical separation of enantiomers 
and diastereomers (3 lectures) 
Prostereoisomerism, Prochirality: Homotopic and heterotopic ligands, hetrotopicity and NMR, 
prochirality and centers (4 lectures) 
Conformation of Acyclic and cyclic Molecules: Conformation of Acyclic molecule, Physical and 
spectral properties of diastereomers and conformers, Conformational aspects of various ring 
size compound, stereochemistry of fused and bridged compounds (10 lectures)  
Stereoselective Synthesis: Convergent Synthesis, Distereoselective synthesis, 
Enantioselective synthesis and double stero-differentations (8 lectures) 
Chiroptical Properties: Optical activity, Anisotropic Refraction, Circular dichroism, application 
of optical activity, separation of stereoisomers by chiral HPLC (4 lectures)   
 
Textbooks  
1. Nasipuri, D., (2011), Stereochemistry of Organic Compounds, 3rd Edition, New Age 
2. Kalsi, P. S., (2017), Stereochemistry Conformation and Mechanism, 9th Edition, New Age  
 
References Books 
1. Gupta, S. S., (2017), Basic Stereochemistry of Organic Molecules, 1st Edition, Oxford 
University Press 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Basak, A, Stereochemistry, NPTEL Course Material, Stereochemistry, Department of 
Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104105086/ 
 
 
 
 
 
17 
 
 
Title Frontiers  in Organic Chemistry Number CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Sc./PhD (CY) Program Type Elective 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Give an in-depth exposure to the latest advances in organic synthesis 
2. Inculcating in students a research-oriented approach towards solving synthetic organic 
chemistry problems 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Advance their knowledge in strategizing and synthesis of complex organic compounds  
2. Systematically read, understand and interpret the research reported in journals 
3. Develop skills of scientific presentations and interpersonal skills  
 
Contents 
Protecting Group: Selectivity and requirement of protecting groups, protecting groups and 
their deprotection (5 lectures) 
Advanced Radical Chemistry: Radical substitution reactions, coupling reactions, radical 
mediated cyclizations, addition reaction involving radicals, radical chain reactions (5 
lectures) 
Cycloaddition Reactions: 1,3-dipolar cycloadditions, higher order cycloadditions, asymmetric 
cycloadditions. (5 lectures) 
Advanced Enolate Chemistry: Diastereoselective aldol reactions, Evan‟s chiral auxiliary, 
Ender‟s chiral auxiliary, diastereofacial selectivity, asymmetric aldol reactions, 
Organocatalyzed aldol reactions (7 lectures) 
Total synthesis of complex molecules: total synthesis of penicillin, estrone, sparteine, 
prostaglandins, synthesis of important pharmaceuticals (12 lectures) 
C-H functionalization and C-H activation: Transition metal free reactions, Pd, Cu, Rh  
catalyzed C-H activation reactions, remote C-H functionalization and activation reactions (8 
lectures) 
 
Text books 
1. Carriera, E.M., and Kvaerno,L., (2009), Classics in Stereoselective synthesis, Wiley-VCH 
2. Kurti,L., Czako,B., (2005), Strategic Applications of Named Reactions in Organic 
Synthesis, Elsevier 
3. Carey,F.A., Sundberg,R.J., (2007), Advanced Organic Chemistry, Part B: Reactions and 
Synthesis, 5th Edition, Plenum 
 
Reference books  
1. Hudlicky,T., and Reed,J.W., (2007) The Way of Synthesis, Wiley-VCH 
2. Nicolaou,K.C., and Snyder,S.A., (2003), Classics in Total Synthesis-II: Further Targets, 
Strategies, Methods, Wiley-VCH 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Punniyamurthy,T., Catalytic Asymmetric Synthesis, NPTEL Course Material, Department 
of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104103067/ 
 
 
  
18 
 
 
Title Heterocyclic Chemistry  Course No. CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry Structure (L-T-P:C) 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Sc./PhD (CY) Program Status Elective 
Pre-requisite  
 
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. Provide insight into the fundamental reactivity and synthesis of heterocycles, and 
2. Broaden their knowledge in the field of heterocyclic chemistry with regard to its 
application in the synthesis of natural products and pharmaceuticals. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
Students will be able to:  
1. Understand the basic heterocyclic principles and apply different types of organic 
reactions in the synthesis of small heterocyclic compounds. 
2. Learn the applications of modern organic synthetic tools in the efficient synthesis of   
heterocycles. 
3. Design and propose routes for the synthesis of natural products and pharmaceuticals 
based on heterocycles. 
 
Contents 
Introduction: Importance of heterocyclic compounds, Nomenclature of heterocyclic ring 
systems (3 lectures) 
Three-membered Heterocycles: Structure, reactivity and synthesis of Oxirane, Thiirane 
and Aziridine (3 lectures) 
Four-membered Heterocycles: Structure, reactivity and synthesis of four membered 
Heterocycles such as Oxetane, Thietane and Azetine (3 lectures) 
Five-membered Heterocycles: Structure, reactivity and synthesis of five membered 
Heterocycles such as Pyrrole and pyrrolidine, Thiophene and tetrahydrothiophene, Furan 
and tetrahydrofuran, chemistry of Pyrazole, Imidazole, Oxazole, Thiazole (10 lectures) 
Six-membered Heterocycles: Structure, reactivity and synthesis of Six membered 
Heterocycles: Pyridine and Piperidine, pyran and Tetrahydropyran, pyridones, Pyridine -N-
oxides (10 lectures) 
Polycyclic heterocycles: Structure, reactivity and synthesis of Indole, Quinoline and 
Isoquinoline, Coumarins and Chromones, benzimidazole and benzoxazole (5 lectures)  
Natural Products and Drugs: Synthesis of selected heterocyclic natural products, 
synthesis of important pharmaceuticals containing heterocycles (5 lectures)  
Modern Methods: Synthesis of heterocycles using modern sustainable methods (3 
lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. J. A. Joule and K. Mills, Heterocyclic Chemistry, 5th Ed., Wiley, 2010. 
 
Reference Books 
1. R. K. Bansal, Heterocyclic Chemistry, 5th Ed., New Age International Private Limited, 
2017. 
 
Self Learning Material  
1. NPTEL Lectures : Heterocyclic Chemistry- http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104105034/ 
 
 
 
 
 
19 
 
Title Polymer Chemistry Number CY7XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
1.  To give students an introduction to polymer world and plastics technology.  
2.  Students will learn the differences between the polymers and their industrial applications.  
3. Students should be aware of the synthetic and environmental risk as well as complete 
process and effort required to this end. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The student should be able to 
● 1.   Understand the general structure of polymers properties of polymers in solution. 
● 2.   Compare the mechanical properties of polymers based on their structures. 
● 3.   Understand industrial application of polymers. 
4.   Assess risks during chemical synthesis of polymer material. 
 
Contents 
Introduction to polymers; classifications of polymers (2 lectures), chain versus step growth 
process, determination of molecular weight of polymers and their distribution; ATRP (atom 
transfer radical polymerization), Ziegler-Natta and ring opening metathesis (8 lectures) 
     polymerizations: living polymerization, polymer microstructure; physical properties of 
polymers; network formation of macromolecules; postpolymerization modification. (8 
lectures)  
     Functional Polymeric Materials: organic/inorganic hybrid materials, porous polymers, 
biodegradable polymers, conducting polymers, smart materials, intelligent gels and 
coordination polymerization, systematic of synthetic polymers and biopolymers (8 lectures)  
     Polymer chemistry: Polymerization, kinetics, structure and decomposition; Polymers in 
solution: thermodynamics, phase equilibrium, diffusion, viscosity, polyelectrolytes and gels. 
(8 lectures) 
     Polymer synthesis in laboratory and characterization. (2 lectures) , Industrial polymerization 
processes. (4 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. P. C. Painter and M. M. Coleman: Fundamentals of Polymer Science, 2. ed., together with 
the problem sets. 
2. Brydson's Plastics Materials, (1993), Eighth edition, J. A. Brydson's, edited by M Gilbert. 
 
Reference Books  
1.  Polymer Chemistry by Charles E. Carraher, sixth edition.  
2.  The Chemistry of Polymers by John W. Nicholson, 3rd edition, RSC publishing. 
 
Self Learning Material  
1.Prof. Dibakar Dhara, IIT Kharagpur https://nptel.ac.in/courses/104105039/ 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Inorganic Chemistry 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21 
 
 
Title Main Group and Bioinorganic Chemistry Number CYL6XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Sc. (CY) Program Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Give better insight into chemistry of main group elements and bioinorganic chemistry 
2. Provide broad knowledge about properties and applications of compounds of main group 
elements and metal ions essential in biological systems. 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Appreciate chemistry of elements essential in biological systems. 
2. To understand structure and bonding concepts in chemistry of s- and p-block elements 
and systematic understanding of their chemical reactivity  
Contents  
Chemistry of main group elements: VSEPR and Point group symmetry, Synthesis, structure 
and bonding in polyhedral boranes and carboranes, Wade‟s Rules, electron count, Isolobal 
analogy. B -N, P -N, S -N unit containing compounds. Compounds of Silicon, Zeolites. 
Hydrides, halides, oxides, nitrides of  s- and p - block elements.  Allotropes of Carbon. 
Chemistry of halogens and Noble gases, Acid -base concept, Chemistry of S -block elements. 
Organometallic compounds of main group elements. (15 Lectures) 
Spectroscopic Characterization: NMR to study fluxion ality and dynamic behavior in 
solution.(2 Lectures) 
Applications of main group compounds: Frustrated Lewis pairs and small molecule 
activation,Synthetic uses of main group complexes, Oxidizing/reducing agents. Precursors 
for materials deposition. Deposition of thin films of materials, with a strong focus on 
Chemical Vapour Deposition (CVD) and ALD.  (9 Lectures) 
PET and SPECT imaging: Overview of the development of radio-labelled p-block complexes 
for applications in PET and SPECT imaging (2 Lectures) 
Bioinorganic Chemistry: Transition metals in biology - their occurrence and function, active -
site structure, Metalloenzymes; O2 binding properties of heme (hemoglobin and myoglobin) 
and non -heme proteins hemocyanin & hemerythrin), co -operativity effect, Bohr Effect; 
representative synthetic models of heme and nonheme systems. Electron transfer proteins - 
active site structure and functions of ferredoxin, rubredoxin and cytochromes, and their 
comparisons. Metals in medicine. (12 Lectures) 
Textbooks  
1. Huheey, J. E., (2008), Inorganic Chemistry, 4th edition, Pearson 
2. Housecroft, C. E., and Sharpe, A. G., (2012), Inorganic Chemistry, 4th Edition, Pearson 
3. Miessler G. L., (2014), Inorganic Chemistry, 4th edition, Pearson 
Reference Books 
1. S. J. Lippard (1994) Principles of Bioinorganic Chemistry, University Science Books.  
2. Norman, N. C., (2014), Periodicity and the p-Block Elements, Oxford Primer Nos. 51,2nd 
Edition, Oxford University Press  
3. Atkins, P. (2010) Inorganic Chemistry, 5th Edition, Oxford University Press 
Self Learning Material  
1. Balakrishna, M. S., Chemistry of Main Group Elements, NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/117101105/  
2. Ray, D., Bioinorganic Chemistry, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Chemistry, 
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104105031/ 
 
 
 
22 
 
 Title Transition Metal and 
Organometallic Chemistry  
Number CYL6XX0 
Department Chemistry Structure L-T-P[C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Sc. (CY) Program Type  Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. To provide students with an overview of transition metal chemistry which form a 
foundation for students pursuing further studies in chemistry 
2. To provide students fundamental of organometallic compounds and their practical 
applications. 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the properties and reactivities of selected transition metal complexes with 
their structure and bonding 
 2.  Utilize the principles of transition metal coordination complexes in understanding      
      reactivity and properties of organometallic compounds 
 
Contents 
Coordination Compounds: Survey of various ligands, coordination, thermodynamic stability, 
Isomerism, Irving-William series, chelate and macrocyclic effect. (5 Lectures) 
Bonding in Coordination Complexes: VBT, CFT and MOT, Crystal Field Stabilization Energies 
and its applications, High and low spin complex, Jahn-Teller theorem. (8 Lectures) 
Reaction mechanismsin Coordination complexes - substitution reactions in complexes, trans  
effect and its influence, water exchange, anation and base hydrolysis, stereochemistry, 
inner and outer sphere electron transfer mechanism (4 Lectures) 
Spectroscopic properties: Color of the complexes,  Selection rules. Splitting of the free ion 
energy levels in Octahedral and Tetrahedral complexes.  Term Symbol, Orgel,  and Tanabe-
Sugano diagrams. (6 Lectures) 
Magnetic Properties: Origin of Magnetic moment,Effect of orbital contributions.(2 Lectures) 
Bonding and properties of organometallic compounds:  Ligands (carbonyl, olefins, 
phosphine, hydride, alkyls, carbines, carbenes). Compounds with carbonyl, olefins, effective 
atomic number (EAN) rule. Classification of ligands-sigma, pi-donor, pi-acceptor.(7 
Lectures) 
Bonding in organometallics: sigma and pi-back bonding, synthesis of organometallic 
compounds. Characterization by FTIR. (3 Lectures) 
Organometallic Reaction and catalysis: Oxidative addition, reductive elimination, CO 
insertion and migration reactions. Applications of Organometallic compounds in 
homogeneous catalysis – isomerization, hydrogenation reaction, hydroformylation, 
Monsanto acetic acid synthesis, C-C coupling reactions, polymerization and metathesis. (6 
Lectures) 
Text Books 
1. Weller, (2014), Inorganic Chemistry, 6th Edition, Oxford University Press 
2. Huheey, J. E. (2006), Inorganic chemistry: principles of structure and reactivity, 4th 
Edition, Pearson  
3. Crabtree, R. H. The Organometallic Chemistry of the Transition Metals, Wiley, 1998 
 
 
Reference Books 
1. Kettle, S.F.A., (2010), Physical Inorganic Chemistry, A Coordination Chemistry 
Approach, Springer 
2. Housecroft, C and Sharpe, A. G. (2012) Inorganic Chemistry, 4th Edition, Pearson 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Ray, D Coordination Chemistry, NPTEL course material, Department of Chemistry, 
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104105033/ 
2. Samuelson, A.G., Introduction to Organometallic Chemistry, NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Inorganic and Physical Chemistry, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104108062/ 
 
 
 
23 
 
Title Solid State and Material Chemistry Number CYL6XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Sc. (CY) Program Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. To provide an overview of the relationships between molecular or solid state structures 
and material properties.  
2. To provide an interdisciplinary understanding of solid state chemistry which aims to 
provide an understanding of how molecular structure affects the properties of 
materials.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. The student will obtain required knowledge for understanding material science 
problems and structure of solids.  
2. Insight into electronic structure of crystals and compare it with the electronic structure 
of nanomaterials, chemical-physical fundamentals as well as basic method of 
characterisation of solids. 
 
Contents 
Structure of Solids: Crystalline and Amorphous, diffraction techniques, symmetry and point 
groups, packing in solids, classification, lattice energy, bonding, structures: NaCl, TiO 2, 
ZnS, wurtzite, Perovskite, covalent and ionic solids.(10 Lectures) 
Crystal defects: non-stoichiometry, cluster, diffusion, Fick‟s Law and Kirkendall effect, 
Identification of defects using microscopic techniques.(6 Lectures) 
Solid state reaction:Chemical and Physical Methods of preparation, reactivity of solids, 
decomposition mechanism, single crystal growth and thin film deposition. (10 Lectures) 
Band theory:Intrinsic and extrinsic semiconductors, insulators,density of states, Dielectrics, 
Hall effect, Thomson, Peltier and Seeback effects.(Lectures 8) 
Properties of Solids: Magnetic, Electrical and Optical properties, Different type of 
Magnetism and Superconductivity, Introduction to nanomaterials and properties.(Lectures 
6) 
 
Textbooks 
1. B. D. Cullity and S. R. Stock, (2014), Elements of X-ray diffraction, 3rd edition, Pearson  
2. West, A.R., (2015), Solid State Chemistry and Its Applications, 2nd edition, John Wiley 
& Sons 
3. Lesley E Smart and Elaine E Moore, (2005), Solid State Chemistry: An Introduction, 3rd 
Edition, Taylor and Francis 
 
Reference Books 
1. Cheetham, A.K. and Day, P., (1997), Solid State Chemistry Compounds, 2nd Edition, 
Clarendon Press, Oxford  
2. Harry R. Allcock, (2008), Introduction to Materials Chemistry, 1st Edition, Wiley. 
3. C N R Rao and J Gopalkrishnan, (2004) New Directions in Solid State Chemistry, 2nd 
Edition, Cambridge. 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Subramaniam, A, Structure of Materials, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Materials Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113104014/16 
 
 
 
 
 
24 
 
 Title Inorganic Chemistry Laboratory Number CYP6XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 0-0-3 [1.5] 
Offered for M.Sc.(CY) Program Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite  
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Emphasize on the different techniques of reaction set-up (air-sensitive, moisture-sensitive 
etc. involved in the synthesis, isolation and purification of inorganic compounds.  
2. Expose students to various spectroscopic identification and characterization techniques. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the basic principles behind the synthesis and properties of inorganic 
compounds. 
2. Plan and Conduct experiments for synthesis and characterizing inorganic compounds. 
 
Contents 
Laboratory Experiments: 
Non-metal complex: Synthesis and characterization of bispyridine iodide nitrate; Solid phase  
synthesis and characterization of trans-bis glycinato copper(II); Synthesis of penta  
amminechlorocobalt(III)chloride and its spectroscopic properties; Influence of ligand field 
tetragonality on the ground state spin of nickel(II) complexes with NH3 and H2O and  
ethylene diamine; Preparation and magnetic properties of FeIII(acac) complex; Preparation 
of TiO2 from Titanium Isopropoxide; Preparation and Characterization of Hydroxyapatite;  
Luminescent Ruthenium Complexes. Synthesis of RuHCl(CO)(PPh3)3 complex and its 
characterisation by 1H, 31P NMR and IR spectroscopy 
 
Text Books 
1. G. S. Girolami, T. B. Rauchfuss, R. J. Angelici Synthesis and Technique in Inorganic 
Chemistry, University Science Books, 3rd Ed, 1999. 
2.Elias, A. J., A Collection of Interesting General Chemistry Experiments, Universities 
Press(India) Pvt. Ltd., 2002 
 
Reference Books 
1. J. Derek Woolins, Inorganic Experiments, 3rd Edition, Wiley, 2010. 
2. Roesky, H. W.; Muckel, K., Chemical Curiosities: spectacular experiments and inspired 
quotes, VCH, 1996. 
3. Handouts prepared for the laboratory experiments: collections from various literature 
sources (ACS Chemical Education) 
 
Self Learning Material 
John Dolhun. 5.301 Chemistry Laboratory Techniques. January IAP 2012. Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology: MIT Open Courseware, https://ocw.mit.edu. 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Elective  
of Inorganic Chemistry  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
26 
 
Title Catalysis for Energy  Number CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for MSc./PhD (CY) Program  Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. To give an overview about defining a roadmap for the role of catalysis in energy 
production 
2. Relate catalysis with fuel cells, hydrogen production and storage, methane storage and 
industrial catalysis 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the role and the possibilities of catalysis in the production of new energy 
carriers and in the utilization of different energy sources.  
2. to go beyond conventional application identifying new developments that may lead to 
breakthroughs in the production of alternative energy. 
 
Contents 
Catalysis: Introduction to heterogeneous catalysis, including models of surface reactivity, 
surface equilibria, kinetics of surface reactions, electronic and geometrical effects in 
heterogeneous catalysis.(Lectures 14) 
Catalytic reactions and application: Trends in reactivity, catalyst structure and composition, 
electro-catalysis and photo-catalysis.(Lectures 12) 
Selected applications and challenges in energy transformations: fuel cells, hydrogen 
production, OER and HER reactions, CO2 oxidation, methane and hydrogen storage and 
industrial catalysis. (Lecture 14) 
 
Textbooks  
1. Hanefeld, U, Lefferts, L. (2018) Catalysis: An Integrated Textbook for Students, 1st 
Edition, Wiley  
 
Reference Books:  
1. Okada, Tatsuhiro, Kaneko, Masao, (2009), Molecular Catalysts for Energy Conversion 
Springer. 
2. Guczi, László, Erdôhelyi, András, Catalysis for Alternative Energy Generation, Springer. 
3. Pierluigi Barbaro, Claudio Bianchini, Catalysis for Sustainable Energy Production, Wiley 
 
Self Learning Material 
1.  Xile Hu, Angamuthu, R and Bera, J. K., Catalysis for Energy Storage, GIAN Course 
material, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LvTfsIAI-VE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
27 
 
Title Nanomaterials and Nanodevices Number CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 2-0-1 [3] 
Offered for MSc/PhD (CY) Program  Type Elective 
Prerequisite  
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Underlying scientific basis for the behavior of nanomaterials 
2. Methods of synthesis, fabrication and characterization of nanomaterials 
3. Scope of nanomaterials and potential translation as products 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Able to describe the basic science behind the properties of materials at the nanometer 
scale 
2. Learn principles behind advanced experimental techniques for studying nanomaterials 
3. Systematically solve scientific problems related specifically to Nano technological 
materials 
 
Contents 
Concepts, Definitions and Examples:Nanoscale processes, nanosystems, nanostructures, 
important nanomaterials such as clusters, nanocrystals, nanotubes and nanowires. (2 
Lectures) 
Size-dependent properties: Quantum confinement, Bandgap, Surface effects in 
nanosystems. Optical, mechanical, electronic and magnetic properties along with surface 
reactivity.(6 Lectures) 
Synthesis of nanomaterials: Top-down and bottom-up, soft versus hard methods, chemical 
and physical methods, hybrid methods for synthesis of nanomaterials.(6 Lectures) 
Experimental methods for the study of nanomaterials:Electron microscopes (SEM and TEM), 
scanning probe microscope (AFM and STM), X- ray photoelectron spectroscopy, BET surface 
area, electroanalytical techniques and miscellaneous methods (6 Lectures) 
Nanolithography for Nanodevices: Concepts and methods; fabrication of devices, clean room 
practices, optical, electron, ion- beam lithography, soft lithography, micromolding, 
nanoimprint lithography. (6 Lectures) 
Applications:Translating nanomaterials and nanodevices as commercial products.(4 
lectures)  
Laboratory Experiments 
 Synthesis of metal nanoparticles, Particle size analysis by UV Visible spectroscopy, 
synthesis of semiconducting ZnO nanoparticles, quantum dots, optical band gap analysis by 
emission spectrum, SEM imaging, AFM analysis, patterning by Photo/Soft 
Lithography,graphene synthesis and surface property analysis  
 
Text Books 
1. Pradeep, T., (2012), Textbook of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, Mc Graw Hill 
2. C. N. R. Rao, P. J. Thomas and G. U. Kulkarni (2007)Nanocrystals: Synthesis, 
Properties and Applications,Springer.   
Reference Books 
1. Nalwa, H. S., (2004), Encyclopedia of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, Edition 
American Scientific Publishers, Los Angeles 
2. Rao, C.N.R. and Govindaraj, A., (2005), Nanotubes and nanowires, RSC Publishing 
3. C. N. R. Rao, P. J. Thomas and G. U. Kulkarni (2007)Nanocrystals: Synthesis, 
Properties and Applications,Springer.  
Self Learning Material 
1. Subramaniam, A., Balani, K. Nanostructures and Nanomaterials: Characterization and 
Properties, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Materials Science & Engineering, 
Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/118104008/;  
 
 
 
 
28 
 
Title Compounds of p-block elements and 
Applications 
Number CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Sc./PhD (CY) Program  Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. To give better insights into the interesting class of compounds such as rings, clusters, 
polymers and low valent complexes of the main-group elements. 
2. To learn about the synthesis, structure and properties of inorganic heterocyclic and 
homocyclic rings. 
3. To discuss about structure, properties and reactivity of clusters and cages of main group 
elements. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Appreciate the interesting class of compounds such as rings, clusters and polymers of 
main group metal compounds. 
2. Gain deeper insights into the synthesis and reactivity of novel main group compounds.  
3. Understand structure-property relationships and applications of inorganic, organometallic 
polymers and low valent compounds. 
 
Contents  
Inorganic Rings: Synthesis, structure and reactivity of compounds containing heterocyclic 
rings of elements such as Phosphorus, Boron, Silicon, Tin and Aluminum. Structure and 
reactivity of compounds containing homocyclic rings of germanium, boron, silicon, 
aluminum. Synthesis and properties of inorganic macrocycles. (10 Lectures) 
Clusters: Clusters and Cages of Ma in Group Elements, Boron Hydrides and Carboranes. 
Homo and Heteropolyatomic Anions of the Post-Transition Elements. (8 Lectures) 
Inorganic polymers: Synthesis, structure -property relationships and applications of 
Polysiloxanes, Polyphosphazenes, polysilanes and organometallic polymers. (10 Lectures) 
Chemistry of Low valent compounds: Low valent compounds of main group elements, 
Recent advances in NHCs and their analogous group 13, 14 and 15 compounds. (6 Lectures)  
Applications: Main group element containing rings, clusters and polymers as single source 
precursors for nanomaterials. Low valent compounds in small molecule activation. (9 
Lectures) 
 
Textbook 
1. Chivers, T. and Manners, I., (2009), Inorganic Rings and Polymers of the p-Block 
Elements, 1st Edition, Royal Society of Chemistry  
2. P. Atkins, (2008), Inorganic Chemistry, Indian Edition, 4th Ed, Oxford University Press 
 
References 
1. H. R. Allcock, (2003), Chemistry and Applications of Polyphosphazenes, Wiley 
2. V. Chandrasekhar, (2005), Inorganic and Organometallic Polymers, Springer-Verlag 
3. M. Driess, (2004), Molecular Clusters of the Main Group Elements, Wiley-VCH 
 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Balakrishna, M. S., Chemistry of Main Group Elements, NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/117101105/ 
 
 
 
 
29 
 
Title Advanced Materials Design Number CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry  L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Sc./PhD (CY) Program Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide a comprehensive overview of synthesis and characterization of bulk materials, 
nanoparticles, nanocomposites and hierarchical materials with nanoscale features. 
2. cover the fundamental scientific principles controlling assembly of nanostructured  
3. materials; synthesis, characterization tools; new properties at the nanoscale, and 
      existing and emerging applications of nanomaterials 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
1. Understand a variety of different methods for synthesizing materials. 
2. Evaluate the synthesis methods against each other and be able to make assessments as 
to what form the final products will be. 
3. Should be able to assess appropriate methods for the synthesis of stable nanomaterials 
 
Contents  
Introduction to Materials Chemistry: Structure, property and their relationship with materials 
performance (3 Lectures) 
Semiconducting Materials Chemistry: Semiconductor Devices, Phase Change Materials in 
Memory Technology, Thermoelectric, Superconductors, Topological Insulators, Emerging 
materials in the device industry such as graphene and 2D materials.(8 Lectures) 
Optical/Opto-electronic Materials: Light Emitting Diodes, Photosensors, Photovoltaics (3 
Lectures) 
Structural & Basic Applied Materials: Structural Materials, Amorphous Materials, Smart & 
Responsive Materials, Bio-inspired materials (8 Lectures) 
Thermal Materials Application: Thermochromics (2 Lectures) 
Energy Materials: Batteries and Supercapacitors, Fuel Cells,Hydrogen generation,Hydorgen 
storage, Carbon capture and sequestration (8 Lectures) 
Student Seminars on Selected Topics from above 
 
Textbooks  
1. Fahlman, Bradley, (2011), Materials Chemistry, 3rd Edition, Springer 
2. P. Yang (2003), The Chemistry of Nanostructured Materials, 1st Edition, World Scientific 
Publishing Company, Singapore 
 
Reference Books  
1. G. Cao, (2004), Nanostructures and Nanomaterials: Synthesis, Properties and 
Applications, Imperial College Press: Hackensack, NJ 
2. Goldstein, J.I. et al. (1992), Scanning Electron Microscopy and X-Ray Microanalysis: A 
Textbook for Biologists, Materials Scientists and Geologists, 2nd Edition, Springer, US.  
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Qureshi, M. Chemistry of Materials, NPTEL Course Material, Indian Institute of Technology 
Guwahati, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104103019/2 
 
 
  
30 
 
Course Title Characterization Techniques in  
Inorganic Chemistry  
Course No. CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Pre-requisite  
 
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1.To provide an introduction to various characterization methods that are applied to 
inorganic chemical systems. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Appreciate different important characterization methods that are applied to inorganic 
chemical systems. 
2. Analyze the chemical and physical characterization of molecular (solution and solid-
state) inorganic chemical systems. 
 
Contents 
Fundamental aspects of characterisation methods in inorganic chemistry. 
Molecular Symmetry: Point group analysis of simple inorganic compounds. Infrared and 
Raman spectroscopy of simple inorganic molecules; predicting number of active modes of 
vibrations, analysis of representative spectra of metal complexes with various functional 
groups. (6 Lectures) 
Electronic spectroscopy: electronic absorption and emission spectroscopy (4 Lectures) 
Multinuclear NMR: Use of 1H and 13C NMR to study  fluxionality and dynamics in inorganic 
and organometallic chemical systems;  NMR spectral analyses of B, Al, Si, F,  and P 
containing compounds. Inorganic and Organometallic compounds of some other NMR active 
nuclei will also be discussed. (11 Lectures) 
EPR: Elementary aspects of Electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy of 
inorganic compounds- g-values, hyperfine and super hyperfine coupling constants; selected 
applications in inorganic chemistry. (5 Lectures) 
Mass spectrometry: basic principles, ionization techniques, isotope abundance, molecular 
ion; illustrative examples from supramolecules, inorganic/coordination and organometallic 
compounds. (5 Lectures) 
X-ray and Photoelectron Spectroscopy: Electron microscopy and energy dispersive analysis 
of X-rays (5 Lectures) 
Cyclic voltammetry: Introduction to cyclic voltammetry and discussion on cyclic 
voltammogram of some representative examples. (5 Lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. R. S. Drago, Physical Methods for Chemists, 2nd Edition, Saunders, 1992. 
 
Reference Books 
1. M. Weller,  Inorganic Chemistry, 6th Edition, Oxford University Press, 2014. 
2. J. E. Huheey, Inorganic Chemistry, Principles of Structure and Reactivity, 4th Edition, 
Pearson, 2006. 
3. F. A. Cotton, Advanced Inorganic Chemistry, 6th Edition, Wiley, 2007. 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Alagarsamy P, Characterization of Materials NPTEL Course Material, Department of      
 Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati,https://nptel.ac.in/courses/115103030/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
31 
 
Course Title  Advance Catalysis  Course No.  CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry  L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  MSc/PhD (CY) Program Type  Elective 
Pre-requisite     
 
Objectives  
The instructor will: 
1. Provide knowledge of key aspects of organometallic chemistry including the different binding 
modes of organic ligands, variation in oxidation states and electron counts.  
2. Provide an understanding of the fundamental types of organometallic reaction, such as 
insertion, oxidative-addition  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1.  understand some fundamental organometallic transformations that underpin the catalytic 
formation of carbon-containing species.   
2. understand basic knowledge, skills and experience useful to those students progressing into 
the chemical industry and research in the area of catalysis 
 
Course Contents  
       Fundamentals of Catalysis :Definition, reaction coordinate diagram, homogeneous 
catalysis, mechanism, catalytic cycle, fundamental organometallic processes, ligand 
substitution, oxidative addition, migratory insertion, transmetallation, reductive elimination, 
transition metals versus homogeneous catalysts, turnover limiting step, features of a catalytic 
process, Effective Atomic Number Rule (18-electron-rule).(8 Lectures) 
      Stereochemistry and Selectivity: Concepts and Definitions,  Isomers, constitution, 
configuration enantiomers and diastereomers, conformation, stereochemical terms-a primer, 
optical activity, methods for determination of enantiomeric excess-chiral stationary phase 
(CSP) GC and CSP-HPLC  and NMR. (8 Lectures) 
       Consequences of diastereoisomerism: (i) resolution of enantiomers via formation of 
diastereomeric salts, (ii) resolution via chromatography (GC and HPLC), (iii) identification of 
absolute stereochemistry, (iv) determination of enantiomeric ratio (er), or enantiomeric excess 
(ee), NMR shift reagents, (iv) diastereoselective synthesis, (v) kinetic resolution, examples and 
(vi) enantioselective synthesis, examples. (7 Lectures)  
      Hammond Postulate: Kinetic and Thermodynamic Control.  Kinetic and thermodynamic 
control, use of energy diagrams, examples: DBr addition to 1,3-butadiene, enolate formation 
from 2-methylcyclohexanone, Hammond postulate, examples: Markovnikov regioselectivity of 
HX addition to monosubstituted alkenes, Orientation in electrophilic aromatic substitution 
reactions (7 Lectures)    
      Asymmetric Catalysis Using Organometallic Reagents: Hammond Postulate and Curtin 
Hammett Concepts, Methods and Origin of Selectivity. CurtinHammett principle,reactivity of 
conformations pyrolytic elimination, Felkin-Anh model for predicting acyclic stereoselection, 
[Rh(L*)]+ X– , L* =chiral ligand)]-catalyzed asymmetric hydrogenation of dehydroamino-acids 
for the synthesis of enantiopure alpha-amino-acids Diastereomeric intermediates and origin of 
selectivity, Pd(0)-catalyzed allylation of stabilized carbon nucleophiles and Rh Catalyzed 
hydrogenation two classical examples with different reaction profiles (10 Lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. 1. F A Cotton, G. Wilkinson, C A Murillo and M Bochmann, Advanced Inorganic Chemistry, 6th 
ed, 1999, WileyInterscience  
2. 2.C Elschenbroich and A Salzer, Organometallics, VCH Publishers, 1st ed 1989, 2nd ed 1993.  
3. 3. R H Crabtree, The Organometallic Chemistry of the Transition Metals, Wiley, 1998  
Reference Books 
4. 1. Ashutosh Tiwari and Salam Titinchi, Advanced Catalytic Materials, Wiley, 2015 
Self Learning Material 
5. 1. NREL Learning,  Biofuels and Bioproducts through Catalysis, 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=srCZqrC4dEo 
6.  
32 
 
Course Title  Water Chemistry   Course No.  CYL7XX0 
Department  Chemistry  L-T-P [C] 2–0–1 [3] 
Offered for  BTech/MTech/MSc/PhD(CY) Program  Type  Elective 
Pre-requisite   Consent of Teacher   
 
Objectives  
The instructor will: 
1. Provide the objective of this course is to provide a fundamental and advance 
understanding of the chemical and biochemical processes that are involved in water 
treatment for drinking purposes and treatment of industrial and domestic wastewaters for 
water reuse and discharge to the environment  
2. Provide knowledge of the key chemical processes relevant to research in water chemistry  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
1. Perform quantitative and qualitative interpretations for water quality analysis 
2. Apply concepts of chemical equilibrium to solve water related practical problems  
 
Course Contents  
Polar nature of water, Acids and bases, Buffering capacity of water (3 Lectures)  
Equilibrium constant expressions,aqueous system including concentration, activities, activity 
coefficients and pH of equilibrium. (4 Lectures) 
Chemical reaction equation and Arrenhius and Bronsted-Lowry acids and bases (4 Lectures) 
Ionization constant reactions and expressions, Self-Ionization of water, Solubility-product 
expressions (4 Lectures) 
Measuring pH, Filtration, Alkalinity and aqueous titrations (3 Lectures) 
Cycling of water and residence time (3 Lectures)  
Water availability,usage, quality and water treatment methods (5 Lectures)  
Analytical methods for water quality analysis (6 lectures) 
Laboratory Experiments 
Measuring color in water, removing turbidity, acidity determination, alkalinity determination, 
chloride in water, hardness test for water, dissolved oxyzen by winkler‟s method 
 
Reference Books 
1. 1. Sawyer, C., McCarty, P., & Parkin G, Chemistry for Environmental and Engineering Science.  
5th Edition. Toronto: McGraw-Hill, 2003 
2. 2. Mark M. Benjamin, 2015, Water Chemistry, Waveland Press, Second Edition, ISBN 1-4786-
2308-X  
Text Books 
1. 1.Werner Stumm, James J. Morgan, Aquatic Chemistry: Chemical Equilibria and Rates in 
Natural Waters, 3rd Edition, Wiley  
2. 2. Kerry J. Howe, David W. Hand, John C. Crittenden, R. Rhodes Trussell, Principles of Water 
Treatment,  George Tchobanoglous, Wiley  
Self Learning Material 
1. NPTEL Lectures: https://nptel.ac.in/courses/122106030/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
33 
 
Title Frontiers in Organometallic Catalysis Number CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
1. To impart advanced knowledge on frontiers of organometallic chemistry.  
2. To teach practical applications of organometallic compounds in homogeneous catalysis 
particularly relevant to industrial applications. 
Learning Outcomes  
1. The learners are expected to gain knowledge of independent thinking in designing, 
characterizing and fine tuning of organometallic complexes suitable for potential catalytic 
transformations. 
2. Learners will be able to delineate mechanistic proposal of catalytic reactions based on the 
available experimental data. 
3. Learners will have an update on current trends and challenges of organometallic chemistry 
towards molecular activation and organic transformations focusing on sustainable 
development. 
Contents  
1.Introduction: Basics of organometallics, 18 e- rule, sigma and pi donor/acceptor ligands 
(5 lectures) 
2. Synthetic, characterization and reactivity strategies of Transition Metal hydrides bearing 
carbonyl, nitrosyl, carbene, phosphine, olefins, and so on as ancillary ligands. Inert bonds 
(C-H, C-C, O-H, N-H) and small molecules (H2, CO, CO2) activation mediated by 
organometallic complexes. (12 lectures) 
3. Definition and concepts of catalysis: Important terminologies in catalysis  
Hydrogenation, dehydrogenation, dehydrogenative coupling reactions, hydrosilylation, 
hydroformylation, hydroamination, hydrocyanation, hydrozirconation, carbonylation, 
Wacker oxidation, Fischer Tropsch synthesis, water gas shift reaction, Olefin 
polymerization, olefin metathesis, Mechanistic pathway interpretation: Kinetic studies, 
Deuterium Kinetic Isotope effect, Rate limiting step, Resting state, Scrambling 
experiments. (13 lectures) 
4. Approaches towards Sustainability using organometallic complexes: Pincer catalysts 
design, Utilization of CO2 and other feed stocks; Sustainable Energy: H2 economy, 
Methanol economy, Liquid organic hydrogen carrier. (6 lectures) 
5.Frustrated Lewis pair Chemistry: Hydroboration, carboboration, small molecule 
activation, catalysis. (5 lectures)   
Textbooks 
1. Crabtree, R. H. The Organometallic Chemistry of the Transition Metals, Wiley, 1998 
2. Gupta, B. D.; Elias, A. J. Basic Organometallic Chemistry: Concepts, Syntheses and 
Applications Paperback, Universities Press; 2nd Edition (May 30, 2013). 
Reference Books  
1. Collman J. P.; Finke R. G.; Norton J. R. Principles & Applications of Organo-transition Metal 
Chemistry, University Science Books 
2. Bhaduri S.; Mukesh, D. Homogeneous Catalysis: Mechanisms and Industrial Applications  
Self Learning Material 
1. Maiti, D. Organometallic Chemistry, NPTEL Course Material, Indian Institute of Technology 
Bombay, 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ITfwjQemwMg&list=PLj_Alq7xw30l8iUgacWidP_83A0r
ZqlBR&index=1 
34 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Physical Chemistry 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
35 
 
Title Quantum Chemistry and Spectroscopy Number CYL6XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Attempt to provide an advanced level understanding of quantum chemistry 
2. Will show a few applications of quantum mechanics to chemistry  
3. Establish the relation between fundamentals of spectroscopy and quantum chemistry  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
1. Understand quantum mechanics and applications to chemistry problems such as 
minimum energy path search, single point calculation and geometry optimization.  
2. Apply spectroscopic methods as analytical tool in chemistry, biology, material science, 
medicine 
 
Contents  
Fundamentals: Old Quantum theory, Correspondence principle, Bohr-Sommerfeld 
quantization, Wave-particle duality, Stern-Gerlach experiment (9 lectures)   
Mathematical Formalism: Operators, Eigenfunctions and eigenvalues, Operators in quantum 
mechanics, expectation values, Theorems of Quantum Mechanics, Commuting and non -
commuting operators, Angular momentum (10 lectures)  
Exactly Solvable Problems: Time independent and time dependent wave equation, Particle 
confined to infinite and finite potential wells, Harmonic oscillator, Rigid rotor, Hydrogen atom 
(10 lectures)  
Approximation Methods: Variational principle, Perturbation theory, Energy and wave function 
corrections, Born-Oppenheimer approximation (8 lectures)  
Introduction to spectroscopy: Introduction to rotational, vibrational spectroscopy, electronic 
transitions, Frank-Condon principle, vertical transitions – selection rules, parity, symmetry 
and spin selection rule (5 lectures)  
 
Textbooks  
1. Levine, I. N., (1983), Quantum Chemistry, 3rd Edition, Allyn and Bacon  
 
Reference Books  
1. McQuarrie,D. A., (1983), Quantum Mechanics, 2nd Edition, University Science Books  
2. Bernath,P. F., (2005), Spectra of Atoms and Molecules, 2nd Edition, Oxford University 
Press, London 
3. Banwell,C. N., (2010), Fundamentals of Molecular Spectroscopy, 4th Edition, Tata 
McGraw Hill, New Delhi 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Krishnan, M. S., Introduction to Quantum Chemistry and Molecular Spectroscopy, NPTEL 
Course Material, Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104106083/ 
 
 
 
36 
 
Title Molecular Thermodynamics and Chemical 
Kinetics 
Number CYL6XX0 
 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
 The Instructor will: 
1. Provide the connection between microscopic theory and thermodynamics.  
2. Describe how complex phenomena can be transferred into simple models. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
1. Predict properties of many-body systems starting from its microscopic  
constituents and their interactions 
2. Connect microscopic theory to chemical reaction 
  
  
CYL6XX1: Thermodynamics [1-0-0] 
thermodynamics laws, state and path functions and their applications; thermodynamic description of 
various types of processes; Maxwell’s relations; spontaneity and equilibria 
Temperature and pressure dependence of thermodynamic quantities; Le Chatelier’s principle (14 
lectures). 
  
CYL6XX2: Statistical Thermodynamics [1-0-0] 
Micro and macro states, canonical, micro canonical and grand canonical ensemble, 
Boltzmann distribution; kinetic theory of gases; partition functions, thermodynamic 
properties from partition functions for model systems; Debye-Huckel theory (14 lectures). 
   
CYL6XX3: Chemical Kinetics [1-0-0] 
Empirical rate laws and temperature dependence; complex reactions; steady state 
approximation, determination of reaction mechanisms  
Mechanism: Theory of reaction rates, activation energy, transition state theory, potential 
energy surface, uni-molecular reaction rate, enzyme kinetics, salt effects (14 lectures). 
Text Books  
1. D. McQuarrie and J. D. Simon, (2014) Molecular Thermodynamics, Viva Books. 
2. D. McQuarrie, (2011) Physical Chemistry, A Molecular Approach, Viva Books.  
 
Self Learning Material  
1. D. McQuarrie, (2000) Statistical Mechanics, University Science Books. 
2. K. J. Laidler, (2013) Chemical Kinetics, Pearson. 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. V.Balakrishnan, Department of Physics, IIT Madras. http://nptel.iitm.ac.in 
2. Leonard Susskind, Statistical Mechanics, Stanford University, 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D1RzvXDXyqA&t=901s 
3. De, A. K. Advanced Chemical Thermodynamics and Kinetics, NPTEL Course Material, 
Chemical Sciences, IISER Mohali, https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc18_cy20/ 
 
  
37 
 
 
Title Theory and Applications of Spectroscopic 
Techniques   
Number CYL6XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce to theoretical background of spectroscopic methods along with their 
instrumentation and application.   
2. Enable students to use such methods whenever needed by giving hands on experience 
with available instruments in the institute.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
1. Apply spectroscopic methods as analytical tool in chemistry, biology, material science, 
medicine.  
2. Operate various spectrometers available in the institute. 
 
Contents  
CYL6XX1: Electronic Spectroscopy [1-0-0] 
Properties of electromagnetic radiation, interaction of radiation with matter, Stimulated and 
Spontaneous processes, Einstein coefficient, Rabi Oscillation, intensity of spectral line and 
line shape, Fourier Transformation, General understanding of spectroscopic selection rule. 
UV-vis and Fluorescence Spectroscopy:  Basic principles, Laws of photochemistry, Jablonski 
diagram, Frank -Condon principle, quantum yield expression and Stern -Volmer equation, 
FRET. (14 lectures) 
CYL6XX2: Infrared and Raman Spectroscopy [1-0-0] 
Basic principle; Organic functional group identification through IR spectroscopy, IR and 
Raman activity. (14 lectures) 
CYL6XX3: NMR and EPR Spectroscopy [1-0-0] 
NMR Spectroscopy: Basic principle, Zeeman splitting, chemical shift and spin-spin coupling, 
introduction to AB, AX, AMX spin system, 1D 1H and 13C NMR for structure elucidation, 
Polarization transfer methods and NOE. EPR Spectroscopy: basic principle, Electron-nuclear 
hyperfine interaction, theory of first order EPR spectra, analysis of 1st Order spectra, 
example of EPR spectra of organic radicals and transition metal complexes.  (14 lectures)  
 
Textbooks  
1. Gunther, H., (1995), NMR Spectroscopy, 2nd Edition, Wiley 
2. Banwell, C. N., (1994), Fundamentals of Molecular Spectroscopy, 3rd Edition, Tata 
McGraw-Hill Book Company 
3. Lakowicz, J. R., (2006), Principles of Fluorescence Spectroscopy, 3rd Edition, Springer, 
New York  
 
Reference Books 
1. Bernath, P. F., (2005), Spectra of Atoms and Molecules, 2nd Edition, Oxford University 
Press  
2. Silverstein, R. M. and Webster, F. M., (2010), Spectroscopic Identification of Organic 
Compounds, 6th Edition, Wiley 
Self Learning Material  
1. Mangal Sundar, K.,  Introduction to Quantum Chemistry and Molecular Spectroscopy, 
http:// http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104106083 
2. Trivedi, V. and Chaudhary, N., Bioanalytical Techniques and Bioinformatics, Department 
of Biotechnology, http:// http://nptel.ac.in/courses/ 102103044.  
3. Das, R., Principles and Applications of Electron Paramagnetic Resonance Spectroscopy, 
Department of Chemical Sciences, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/104106048/2 
 
38 
 
 
Course Title Physical Chemistry Laboratory Course No. CYP6XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 0-0-3 [1.5] 
Offered for M.Sc. (CY) Program Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite   
 
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. Introduction to the different spectroscopic and analytical techniques.  
2. Introduction to the instrumentation and application of these methods.   
3. Enable students to use such methods whenever needed by giving hands on experience 
with available instruments in the institute.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Clear understanding of different analytical instruments.  
2. Experimental verification of fundamental concept 
3. Application of spectroscopic techniques as analytical tool in chemistry.  
Course Content 
1. Determination of the pI of an Amino Acid using pHmeter. 
2. Determination of critical micellar concentration by conductometry and calculation of free 
energy of micellization 
3. Determination of Heat Capacity of metals by Dynamic Scanning Calorimeter and 
verification of Dulong and Petit Method 
4. Determination of the ligand-protein binding constant using Fluorescence quenching 
technique 
5. Determination of 1H spin-lattice relaxation time by NMR Inversion Recovery method 
6. Determination of Gibbs free energy of the keto-enol tautomerism by 1H NMR 
7. Determination of bromobenzene surface coverage on silica by FTIR 
8. Study of surface properties (surface energy and surface tension) of various surfaces and 
solutions. 
9. Study of Redox reactions for understanding the reversibility of the reactions using cycli c 
voltammetry 
10. Surface Adsorption Kinetics of Dyes on activated carbon using UV-Visible 
spectroscopy/calorimetry 
 
Text   Text Books 
1. Halpern, A. M.; McBane, G. C. Experimental Physical Chemistry: A laboratory Textbook, 
3rd ed. W. H. Freeman, 2006.  
Reference Books  
Literature papers from ACS Chemical Education 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
39 
 
 
Title Computational Chemistry Laboratory Number CYP6XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 0-0-3 [1.5] 
Offered for M.Sc. (CY) Program Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite CYL6XX0 (Chemical Binding) Or Equivalent    
 
Objectives  
 The Instructor will: 
1. Provide the connection between theory and experiments 
2. Provide the understanding of how complex phenomena can be transferred into simple 
models. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
1. Learn tools and techniques used in computational chemistry. 
2. Develop computational skills related to chemistry. 
 
Contents  
1.Drawing the geometry of a molecule - Read XYZ coordinates - measure bond distances and 
angles (MOLDEN). 
2.Using a fixed nuclear geometry, compute the ground state electronic energy of a molecule 
using Hartree-Fock, MP2, and DFT. 
3.Perform geometry optimization (energy minimization) using different theories. 
4.Compute the vibrational frequencies and differentiate a minimum and a saddle point.  
5.Calculate potential energy profile and intrinsic reaction coordinate of a reaction. 
6.Learn visualizing bulk system using computer (VMD). 
7.Build bonded and non-bonded potential parameters after geometry optimization. 
8.Energy minimization of a bulk system at meso-scale. 
9.Different ensembles, NVT, NPT, NVE. 
 
Text Books  
1. Levine, I. N., (1983), Quantum Chemistry, 3rd Edition, Allyn and Bacon  
2. Molecular Modelling: Principles and Applications, Andrew Leach, 2nd Edition, Pearson. 
3. Daan Frenkel and Berend Smit, (2002) Understanding Molecular Simulation, Academic 
Press. 
 
Reference books  
1. Mark E. Tuckerman, Statistical Mechanics, (2010) Theory and Molecular Simulations, 
Oxford University Press. 
2. Szabo, A.and Ostlund, N.S. (1996), Modern Quantum Chemistry, Dover. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electives of Physical 
Chemistry 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
41 
 
 
Title Numerical Methods and Group 
Theory 
Number CYL6XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Pre-requisite    
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. Basic mathematics and numerical techniques required for Chemistry students 
2. Knowledge on error analysis to be used for laboratory courses  
3. Provide the fundamentals of group theory to understand structure, chemical bonding and 
spectroscopy   
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Ability to analyze data and perform error analysis on the data  
2. Ability to understand and appreciate the mathematical and group theoretical concepts behind 
chemical theories  
 
Contents 
Mathematical Concepts: Vectors and Vector spaces, Operators, Orthogonal and Unitary 
matrices, Diagonalization, Matrix eigenvalue problems, Systems of linear algebraic equations, 
Determinants, Ordinary and partial differential equations, Fourier and Laplace transformation 
(15 lectures)  
Numerical Methods: Errors in Data, Absolute and relative errors, Distribution of Errors, Central 
Limit Theorem, Linear regression and correlation, Interpolation, Roots of Equations, Algorithms 
for Matrix (15 Lectures) 
Group Theory: Symmetry elements and Point Groups, Group postulates and definitions, Group 
multiplication tables, Subgroups and cosets, Symmetry classes and conjugates, Reducible and 
irreducible representations, Representations and character tables, Group theory and quantum 
mechanics, Group theory and chemical bonding, Applications of group theory to structures and 
spectroscopy, Group theory and crystal symmetry (12 Lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. Kreyszig, E., (2011) Advanced Engineering Mathematics, 9th Ed., Wiley 
2. Cotton, F. A., (2008) Chemical Applications of Group Theory, 3rd Ed., Wiley India 
 
Reference Books: 
1.Louis, L., (1991) A Practical Guide to Data Analysis for Physical Science students, Cambridge 
University Press 
2. Louis, L., (2005) Mathematics for Science Students, Cambridge University Press 
3. Arfken, W. and Harris, P. (2012) Mathematical Methods for Physicists, 7th Ed., Elsevier 
 
Self Learning Material: 
1. Iyengar, S. R. K., Numerical Methods and Computation, NPTEL course material, Department 
of Mathematics, IIT Delhi 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=88ys5ZIolSg&list=PL6E313980EF23CA6E 
2. Chandra, M., Chemical Applications of Symmetry and Group Theory, NPTEL course material, 
Department of Chemistry, IIT Kanpur 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Av9f25sqLG0&list=PLj_Alq7xw30knZPTpa9whzqiSn_RZHG
WP 
 
 
 
42 
 
Title Chemical Binding  Number CYL6XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Pre-requisite Basic Quantum Chemistry    
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide high level understanding of a chemical bond using quantum mechanics.  
2. Describe knowledge of modern techniques in quantum chemistry. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
1.  Use modern quantum chemistry techniques to solve fundamental problems related to basic 
chemistry. 
2.  Understand a chemical bond. 
 
Contents  
CYL6XX1: Multi-electron systems [1-0-0] 
 
Electronic structure: Variation theory, perturbation theory, electron spin, He atom, Pauli 
exclusion principle, Slater determinant (14 lectures) 
 
CYL6XX2: Electronic structure theory [2-0-0] 
 
Electronic structure of diatomic molecules: Born Oppenheimer approximation, Atomic units, 
H2
+ ion, H2 molecule, VB theory, MO theory, Semi-empirical methods (13 lectures) 
Wave function based theory: Hartree-Fock theory, Electron correlation, Self-consistent field 
wave function, Moller-Plesset theory, Coupled cluster formulation (12 lectures) 
Density functional theory (DFT):  Principles of density functional theory, commercial 
functionals and applications (3 lectures)   
 
Textbook 
1. Levine, I. N., (2000) Quantum Chemistry, Pearson education. 
2. Lowe, J. P., (1995) Elementary Quantum Chemistry, Academic Press. 
 
Reference Books 
1.  Szabo, A. and Ostlund, N. S., (1996) Modern Quantum Chemistry, Dover. 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. K. Mangala Sunder, Introduction to Chemistry & Quantum Chemical Methods, NPTEL course 
material, Department of Chemistry, IIT Madras, http://nptel.iitm.ac.in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
43 
 
Title Principles of Nuclear Magnetic Resonance  Number CYL6XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduction to Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectroscopy with an emphasis on 
the basic principle along with instrumentation and application.  
2. Enable students to understand the design of NMR experiments and analyze NMR 
spectrum to extract information of interest.   
3. Introduce to NMR experiments by giving hands on experience on the instrument 
available in the institute.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
1. Understand the theoretical background of solution state NMR.  
2. Apply NMR experimental methods as an analytical tool in chemistry, biology, material 
science, medicine for structure and dynamic studies of molecules.   
3. Understand instrumentation of NMR spectrometer available in the institute. 
 
Contents  
Introduction to NMR: Spin density operator, concept of density matrix, Liouville-Von-
Neuman equation, the nuclear spin Hamiltonian- gyromagnetic ratio –energy level Diagrams-
Zeeman Splitting. (12 lectures) 
Introduction to NMR parameters: Chemical shifts and couplings, longitudinal and transverse 
relaxation process – Redfield relaxation theory – paramagnetic relaxation, correlation times 
and relaxation times. (10 lectures) 
Introduction to 1D Fourier Transformspectroscopy: Bloch equation in the rotating frame – 
pulse sequence design – 1D 1H and 13C NMR for structure elucidation – measurement of 
relaxation rates, Nuclear Overhauser effect, effect of chemical exchange. (10 lectures) 
Introduction to 2D NMR, correlation spectroscopy: common pulse sequences –homo and 
hetero nuclear correlation spectroscopy –examples of COSY, TOCSY and NOESY – Application 
–chemical structure –biological processes – molecular dynamics etc.  
aboratory demonstration of standard NMR experiments. (10 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Farrar, T.C. and Becker, E.D., (1971), Pulse and Fourier Transform NMR, 1st Edition, 
Academic Press 
2. Gunther, H., (1995), NMR Spectroscopy, 2nd Edition, Wiley 
3. Derome, A. E., (1987), Modern NMR Techniques for Chemistry Research, 1st Edition, 
Pergamon Press  
 
Reference Books 
1. Ernst, R. R., Bodenhausen, G. and Wokaun, A., (1987), Principles of Nuclear Magnetic 
Resonance in One and Two Dimension, 2nd Edition, Clarendon Press  
2. Claridge, T. D. W., (1999), High Resolution NMR Techniques in Organic Chemistry, 1st 
Edition, Elsevier 
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Atreya, H. S., Principles and Applications of NMR Spectroscopy, NPTEL Course Material, 
NMR Research Center, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, 
https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc18_ge07 
 
 
44 
 
Title Molecular Dynamics Simulations Number CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry  L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide high level understanding of the connection between dynamics of molecules 
and their macroscopic properties 
2. Describe modern techniques in molecular simulations using high speed computers 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
1. Use modern simulation techniques to solve fundamental problems related to 
interdisciplinary areas of Physics, Chemistry and Biology 
2. Find explanations for phenomena related to soft condensed matter 
 
Contents  
Basics of Molecular Dynamics: Theoretical foundation of classical statistical mechanics, 
Boltzmann‟s relation, harmonic oscillator and harmonic baths, introduction to molecular 
dynamics, Algorithms for equations of motions (10 lectures), 
 
Various ensembles: Purpose of ensembles in simulations, canonical ensembles, isobaric 
ensembles, grand canonical ensembles, applications of ensembles, thermostat,  Barostat (10 
lectures) 
Advance Techniques: Free energy perturbation theory, Thermodynamic Integration, 
Jarzynski‟s equality, Umbrella Sampling (10 lectures) 
Applications:  How to set up Membrane system, protein and small biological molecules (12 
lectures)  
 
Textbooks  
1. D. Frenkel and B. Smith, (2002), Understanding Molecular Dynamics Simulations,1st 
Edition, Academic Press  
2. Mark Tuckermann, (2010), Statistical Mechanics and Molecular Simulations, 1st Edition, 
Oxford University  
 
Self Learning Material  
1. M. P. Allen and T. J. Tildesley., (1993), Computer Simulations of liquids, 1st Edition, 
Oxford Science Publications  
 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. Banerjee, T. Molecular simulations, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Chemical 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/103103036/ 
2. Tembe, B.L., Computational Chemistry and Classical Molecular Dynamics, NPTEL Course 
Material, Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, 
https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc18_cy13 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
 
Course Title Solid State NMR Methods for Materials Number  CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
The course will enable 
1. Introduction to essential techniques of solid state NMR 
2. Introduction to various spin interactions important in solid state e.g., chemical shift 
anisotropy, dipolar coupling etc.  
3. To enable students to understand the design of solid state NMR experiments and 
analyze NMR spectrum to extract information on solid state structure and dynamics.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Have basic understanding of the theoretical background of solid state NMR. 
2. Application of solid state NMR in the field of materials relevant in medicine, renewable 
energy, polymers etc. 
3. Understanding of various solid state methods that can be applied to characterize 
materials of interest.  
 
Contents  
Introduction to various nuclear spins other than 1H relevant for solid state materials: 
quadrupolar nuclei, concept of chemical shift anisotropy (CSA), scalar coupling, dipolar 
coupling and quadrupolar interactions, relation between shielding tensor and electronic 
structure, powder averaging. (8 lectures) 
Introduction to nuclear spin Hamiltonian relevant in solid state: cross polarization, isotropic 
mixing Hamiltonian, solid state echo sequence, Homo and heteronuclear decoupling, concept 
of spin diffusion and polarization transfer, concept of Nuclear Quadrupole Resonance (NQR) 
(10 lectures) 
Introduction to NMR techniques: powder line shape, determination of anisotropy, Magic 
Angle Spinning (MAS), generation of spinning sideband patterns, sideband modulation, 
molecular structure and dynamics determination by probing ssb manifolds, Techniques for 
measuring CSA and orientation of shielding tensor, measurement of homo and 
heteronuclear dipolar coupling, correlation experiments. (10 lectures) 
Introduction to molecular dynamics: powder line shape analysis-relaxation time studies-2D 
rotor synchronization and Exchange Spectroscopy (EXSY). (10 lectures) 
Application of solid state NMR: in polymers, nanomaterials, drugs, narcotics, explosives etc., 
recent advances in 1D solid state methods for dynamics, application of NQR. (4 lectures)  
 
Text Books 
1. Duer, J. M., (2005), Introduction to Solid State NMR, Wiley. 
Reference Books 
1. Ernst, R. R., Bodenhausen, G., Wokaun, A., (1987), Principles of Nuclear Magnetic 
Resonance in One and Two Dimension, Clarendon Press, Oxford.  
2. Bakhmutov, V. I., (2011), Solid-State NMR in Materials Science- Principles and 
Applications, CRC Press. 
Self Learning Material 
1. Atreya, H. S., Principles and Application of NMR spectroscopy, NMR Research Center, 
IISC Bangalore, https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc18_ge07/preview 
2. Molugu, T. R., Lee, S., Brown, M. F., Concepts and Methods of Solid State NMR 
Spectroscopy Applied to Biomembranes, 2017, Chem. Rev., 117, 12087-12132 
3. Dybowski, C., Bai, S., Solid State NMR Spectroscopy, 2008, Anal. Chem., 80, 4295-
4300.  
 
  
46 
 
 
Title Group Theory and Molecular Spectroscopy Number CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for MSc./Ph.D. (CY) Program Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide basic and advanced group theoretical concepts and their applications in bonding,    
spectroscopy, and solid state chemistry. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
1. Analyze and understand the concept of point group and symmetry associated with 
molecular frameworks  
2. Apply the knowledge of group theory to understand bonding, and structure in chemical 
species.   
 
Contents  
Introduction: The nature of the problem, symmetry operations, elements and operators, 
groups and group theory- general definitions, defining, deriving and recognizing point groups, 
subgroups and cosets, classes, group multiplication table (10 Lectures) 
Theory of group representations: The great orthogonality theorem, character of a 
representation, reducible and irreducible representations, construction of character tables and 
physical interpretation, application of representation theory in quantum mechanics, direct-
product groups (10 Lectures) 
Applications to Chemical Bonding and spectroscopy: Molecular orbitals, applications to valence 
bond theory and molecular orbital theory, bonding in homonuclear diatomic molecules of 
transition metal, molecular orbitals in complex compounds, Huckel molecular orbital theory, 
application of group theory to UV-Visible, IR and Raman spectroscopy (14 Lectures) 
Group theory and crystal symmetry: Crystal systems and classes, translational and space 
groups, symmorphic and nonsymmorphic space groups, applications of space group, factor 
group (8 Lectures) 
 
Textbooks 
 
1. Cotton, F. A., (1990) Chemical Applications of Group Theory, 3rd edition Wiley-Interscience 
2. Vincent, A., (2013) Molecular Symmetry and Group Theory: A Programmed Introduction to 
Chemical Applications, 2nd Edition Wiley 
 
Reference Books 
1.Engel, T. and Reid, P., (2012), Quantum Chemistry and Spectroscopy, 3rd Edition, Pearson  
 
Self Learning Material  
1.Chandra, M., Chemical Applications of Symmetry and Group theory, NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, 
https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc18_ch02/preview 
 
 
 
 
 
47 
 
 
Title Modern Electronic Structure Theory Number CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–3 [4] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite Basic Quantum Chemistry    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide knowledge of modern electronic structure theories and basic computational 
chemistry techniques and tools to carry out electronic structure calculations and interpret 
experimental spectra 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Carry out electronic structure calculations and interpret experimental spectra 
2. Write simple computer programs to carry out calculations 
 
Contents  
Review of basics: Linear algebra, numerical techniques, postulates of quantum mechanics, 
Born-Oppenheimer approximation, concept of potential energy surface, variational and 
perturbation approaches (14 lectures)  
Electronic structure theories: Hartree-Fock (HF) and post-HF theories, Moller-Plesset theory, 
density functional theory, coupled cluster theory, electron correlation, configuration 
interaction, excited states, time dependent density functional theory (14 lectures)  
Techniques: Energy minimization, vibrational frequency analysis, symmetry analysis, zero 
point energy calculation, intrinsic reaction coordinate, distinguishing stationary points, 
atomic charges, Mulliken analysis (14 lectures)  
 
Laboratory Experiments 
Electronic structure calculations; Geometry optimization; simple Fortran programming; 
finding intrinsic reaction coordinates; computing potential and free energy profiles   
 
Textbook 
1. Levine, I. N., (2016), Quantum Chemistry, 7th Edition, Pearson Education 
2. McQuarrie, D. A., (2016), Quantum Chemistry, 2nd Edition, Viva Books 
3. Szabo, A., (1996), Modern Quantum Chemistry, Dover Publications 
 
Reference Books 
1. Jensen, F., (2017), Introduction to Computational Chemistry, 3rd Edition, Wiley-Blackwell 
2.  Cramer, C. J., (2004), Essentials of Computational Chemistry, 2nd Edition, Wiley-
Blackwell 
 
Self Learning Course Material 
1. Simons, J.: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z5cq7JpsG8I 
 
 
 
 
 
48 
 
 
Title Chemical Reaction Dynamics Number CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite Basic Quantum Chemistry    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide introduction to reaction dynamics in the gas phase and many advanced 
concepts in scattering theory.  
2. Compare experimental data with dynamics simulations.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
1. Interpret experimental data in terms of classical and quantum scattering theory 
2. Design and perform advanced dynamics simulations.  
 
Contents  
Reactive collisions: Fundamentals, Potential energy surfaces, Crossed molecular beams, 
state-to-state cross sections, Classical and quantum scattering process (15 lectures)  
Rate theories: Kinetic theory of gases, Transition state theory (TST), Rice-Ramsperger-
Kassel-Marcus (RRKM) theory, Microcanonical and thermal rate constants 
Gas phase dynamics: Photodissociation, energy transfer dynamics, intramolecular vibrational 
energy flow, mode selective chemistry with Lasers (20 lectures) 
Condensed phase dynamics: Solvation, Diffusion, Kramer-Grote-Hynes model, Correlation 
functions (7 lectures)  
 
Textbooks  
1. R. D. Levine, (2009) Molecular Reaction Dynamics, Reprint Edition, Cambridge 
University Press, USA.  
 
Reference Books  
1. T. Baer and W. L. Hase, (1996), Unimolecular Reaction Dynamics: Theory and 
Experiments, Oxford University Press, USA  
2. A. Nitzan, (2006), Chemical Dynamics in Condensed Phases, Oxford University Press, 
USA  
 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. Halder, M., Reaction Dynamics, NPTEL lectures,  Department of Chemistry, Indian 
Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104105041/31 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
49 
 
Title Biophysical Techniques: Theory and 
Applications 
Number CYL3XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Sc/PhD Program, B.Tech Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce basic knowledge of a few biophysical methods and their application in the 
interdisciplinary area of chemistry and biology.  
2. To have a greater understanding of the underlying theory of these methods and their 
practical applications in the laboratories.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Understand the underlying principle of different biophysical methods.  
2. To be able to use important biophysical methods to decipher problems relevant to 
biology.  
3. Better understand the structure-function activity of biomolecules. 
 
Course Content 
Spectroscopic methods: Concepts of spectral transition and analysis of spectrum, Application 
of UV-VIS spectroscopy in protein folding kinetics, Advance topics in fluorescence such as 
anisotropy, resonance energy transfer and real time fluorescence; principle of Circular 
dichroism, optical rotatory dispersion methods and applications, Principle of Surface Plasmon 
Resonance spectroscopy, SPR optical phenomenon, application of SPR in ligand -protein 
interaction. (15 lectures) 
Magnetic Resonance based methods: Principles of NMR and EPR, Concept of relaxation and 
polarization transfer, application of 1D and 2D NMR methods in biomolecules, EPR 
transitions, identification of metal centers in biomolecules, spin labelling and motions of side 
chains. (15 lectures) 
Calorimetric techniques: Principles and applications of Isothermal Titration Calorimetry, 
Differential Scanning Calorimetry, applications in biomolecules. (7 lectures) 
Centrifugation Techniques: Concepts and fundamentals of centrifugation. Ultracentrifugation 
techniques in biology. (5 lectures ) 
Textbook  
1. Cox, M.M, Nelson, D.L., Lehninger (2009) Principles of Biochemistry,  6th Edition, W.H. 
Freeman & Co, 
2. Gunther, H., (1995), NMR Spectroscopy, 2nd Edition, Wiley 
3. Circular Dichroism – Principles and Application, (2000) Edited by Brova, N., Nakanishi, 
K., Woody, R. W., 2nd Ed., Wiley.  
 
Reference Books 
1. Claridge, T. D. W., (1999), High Resolution NMR Techniques in Organic Chemistry, 1st 
Edition, Elsevier 
2. Stryer, L., Berg, J.M., Tymoczko, J.L., (2012) Biochemistry, W.H.Freeman & Co Ltd  
3. Lakowicz, J. R., (2006), Principles of Fluorescence Spectroscopy, 3rd Edition, Springer, 
New York  
 
Self Learning Material  
1. NPTEL lectures: https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc19_cy07/preview 
2. Sharma, K. A., Analytical Technologies in Biotechnology, Dept. of Biotechnology, IIT 
Roorkee, https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc19_cy07/preview 
 
 
 
50 
 
Course Title Stochastic Problems in Biophysics Number CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective    
Pre-requisite  
 
Objectives 
The course will enable: 
1. To understand applications of fundamental probability methods to a wide variety of 
problems related to biophysics. 
2. To show the mathematical literature on this subject 
3. To understand non-equilibrium statistical mechanics 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Ability to translate complex phenomena into simple models  
2. Ability to derive mathematical models for problems related to biophysics 
 
Course Content 
1. Introduction: Historical examples, Joint and conditional Probabilities, Correlation functions 
and Cumulants, Gaussian and Poissonian Probability Distributions (14 lectures)  
2. Markov Processes: Chapman-Kolmogorov Equation, Examples of Markov Processes  (10 
lectures) 
3. Brownian Motion: Basic assumptions, Langevin Equation, Fokker-Planck Equation, Master 
Equations and Jump Processes, Linear Response Theory  (18 lectures) 
  
Text Books 
1. Landau and Lifshitz, Statistical Physics, Elsevier, 2005 
2. David Chandler, Introduction to Modern Statistical Mechanics, Oxford University Press, 1987 
Self Learning Materials 
1. C. W. Gardiner, Handbook of Stochastic Methods for Physics, Chemistry and Natural 
Sciences, Springer-Verlag, 1983 
2. Edited and Introduced by John Stachel, Einstein’s Miraculous Year, Princeton University 
Press, 1998. 
3. S. Chandrashekhar, Reviews of Modern Physics, vol 15, No 1, APS 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Prof. V. Balakrishnan, IIT Madras: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qNmB1qNjZ0k 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
51 
 
Course Title Polymer Dynamics Course No. CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P[C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type  Elective    
Pre-requisite  
 
Objectives 
1. 1. To understand basic principles and theory of  modern macromolecules 
2. 2. To  understand the analogy to other branches of science at a more fundamental level 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Ability to realize that polymers are essential ingredients in biological machinery 
2. Ability to do advanced calculations more modestly 
 
Course Content 
Ideal Chain : Freely joint chain, Flexibility of a polymer chain, Gaussian Chain, Ideal chain as a 
random walk, Ideal polymer by an external force, Flory Calculation (12 lectures)  
Polymer chains with volume interactions and Melts : Models with volume interactions, ideal 
melts, chains in solvents (10 lectures)  
Dynamics: Rouse model, Zimm Model,  Real polymer coil, Reptation model (10 lectures)  
Biopolymers:Properties, Primary structure, Secondary structure, Helix-coil transition (10 
lectures) 
  
Text Books 
1. M. Doi and S. F. Edwards, The Theory of Polymer Dynamics, Oxford Science Publications, 
1990. 
Self Learning Materials 
1. Alexander Yu. Grosberg and Alexei R. Khokhlov,  Statistical Physics of Macromolecules,  AIP 
Press, 1994 
2. Pierre-Gilles de Gennes, Scaling Concepts in Polymer Physics, Cornell University Press, 
1979 
Preparatory Course material 
1. George Phillies lectures a series of graduate classes, based on his book "Phenomenology of 
Polymer Solution Dynamics" Cambridge University Press, 2011. 
2. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mVzrYKkeJzE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
52 
 
Course Title Statistical Mechanics and Molecular 
Simulations 
Course No. CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Pre-requisite  
 
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. To understand the complex soft matter system that bridges the traditional disciplines of 
physics, chemistry and biology using modern theoretical methodology and high-speed 
computers. 
2. To explore the connections between basic statistical mechanical theories and real world 
applications in studying physical, chemical and biological phenomena. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Understanding basic principles of Statistical Mechanics and Molecular Dynamics Simulations. 
2. Mathematical formalism associated with theory and techniques of molecular modelling.  
3. Few real world applications to understand the connections between microscopic and 
macroscopic world. 
 
Course Content 
Statistical basis of thermodynamics:  Introduction to Statistical Methods, Micro and Macro 
states, Ensemble theory (micro-canonical, canonical, isobaric, grand-canonical), Mathematical 
techniques (5 lectures) 
Classical Statistical Mechanics: Partition functions, Thermodynamic functions, Phase space and 
Liouville equation, Distribution functions, Kirkwood integrals (10 lectures).  
(Module 3 of ``Statistical Physics” by Physics department) Fluctuations: Thermodynamic 
fluctuations, Spatial correlations in a fluid, Einstein-Smoluchowski theory of Brownian motion, 
Langevin theory,Fokker-Planck equation, Fluctuation-dissipation theory, Onsager relations (12 
lectures) 
Introduction to Molecular Modeling: Algorithms, Periodic boundary conditions, Interaction 
functions and force fields, Electrostatics, Molecular dynamics in various ensembles (10 lectures)  
Applications:Brownian dynamics simulations, Biological applications for proteins and 
membranes (5 lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. Mark E Tuckerman, Statistical Mechanics and Molecular Simulations, Oxford University, 
2010 
2. David Chandler, Introduction to Modern Statistical Mechanics, Oxford University Press, 
1987  
Self Learning Material 
1. M. P. Allen and T J Tildesley, Computer Simulations of Liquids, Oxford Science Publications, 
1993 
2. D. A. Mcquarrie, Statistical Mechanics, University Science Books, 2000 
3. D. Frenkel and B. Smit, Understanding Molecular Dynamics Simulations, Academic press, 
2002 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/mechanical-engineering/2-57-nano-to-macro-transport-
processes-spring-2012/ 
 
 
 
  
53 
 
 
Course Title Advanced Electrochemistry and 
Applications 
Number CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Pre-requisite  
 
Objectives 
The instructor will 
1. Provide an introductory but thorough background in electrochemistry. 
2. Provide fundamentals of electrochemical systems, electroanalytical techniques and 
advanced applications. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. describe the difference between equilibrium properties and properties of electrochemical 
systems and apply electrochemical methods for required information. 
2. explain the functioning of electrochemical devices as well as the commonly employed 
underlying electrochemical reactions 
 
 Contents 
Introduction to Electrochemistry: Nernst equation, electrode kinetics, dynamic 
electrochemistry, the Butler-Volmer and Tafel equations. Overpotentials. Kinetically and 
mass transport controlled electrochemical processes. Mass transport by migration, 
convection and diffusion. Conductivity. (Lectures 7) 
Electrochemical Methods: Potentiostatic and galvanostatic electrochemical methods including 
chronoamperometry, coulometry, cyclic voltammetry, chronopotentiometry, ac impedance 
spectroscopy, spectroelectrochemistry and hydrodynamic methods.(Lectures 8)  
Solid state electrochemistry. Ion conducting and electronically conducting polymers; Th e 
electrochemical double layer. (5 Lectures) 
Surface confined electrochemical processes: The fundamentals of corrosion. Homogeneous 
and heterogeneous electrocatalysis (HER and OER). Electrochemical processes coupled to 
chemical steps. Nanostructured and surface modified electrodes. (8 Lectures) 
Application: Introduction to batteries, fuel cells and electrochemical solar cells. (7 Lectures) 
Electrochemical processes of particular relevance to energy conversion.(5 Lectures)  
 
Text Books 
1. D. I. Antropov, Theoretical Electrochemistry, Mir Publishers, 1972. 
2. J. M. Bockris and A. K. N. Reddy, Modern Electrochemistry, Vol.1 and 2, Plenum Press, 1998.  
3. Industrial Electrochemistry, 2nd ed, Pletcher, Derek/Walsh, Frank C., London: Chapman and 
Hall, 1990 
4. Electrochemistry for Chemists, 2nd ed, Sawyer, Donald T./Sobkowiak, Andrej/Roberts, Julian 
L., New York: John Wiley, 1995 
 
Reference Books 
1. Transient Techniques in Electrochemistry, Macdonald, Digby D., New York: Plenum Press, 
1977  
2. Laboratory Techniques in Electroanalytical Chemistry, (2nd edition) by Peter Kissinger 
and William Heineman (Marcell Dekker) 1996 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. NPTEL material: https://nptel.ac.in/courses/104106105/ 
 
 
 
54 
 
 
 
Course Title Hands On -1 Course No. CYP6XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 0-0-3 [1.5] 
Offered for M.Sc. (CY) Program Type Compulsory  
Pre-requisite   
 
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. Provide the students hands-on training using the available characterization tools .  
2. Provide students with the knowledge and skills needed to conduct laboratory research, 
understand instrument design and analyze instrumental results. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Clear understanding of different analytical instruments.  
2. Experimental verification of fundamental concept 
3. Application of spectroscopic techniques as analytical tool in chemistry.  
 
Contents 
1. NMR Working principles and instrumentation 
2. Single Crystal X-Ray Diffraction  Working principles and instrumentation 
3. Electroanalytical Methods (Ampereometry, Cyclic Voltametry, EIS spectroscopy etc) 
4. SEM Working principles and instrumentation 
5. AFM Working principles and instrumentation 
6. UV-Vis Working principles and instrumentation 
7. IR Working principles and instrumentation 
8. TGA/DSC Working principles and instrumentation 
9. BET Surface Area Analyser Working principles and instrumentation 
10. PXRD Working principles and instrumentation 
 
Text Books 
1. Halpern, A. M.; McBane, G. C. Experimental Physical Chemistry: A laboratory Text 
Book, 3rd ed. W. H. Freeman, 2006.  
 
 Reference Book:  
1. Literature References from ACS Chemical Education 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
55 
 
 
Course Title Hands on -2 Course No. CYP6XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 0-0-3 [1.5] 
Offered for M.Sc. (CY) Program Type Compulsory  
Pre-requisite   
 
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. Provide the students hands-on training using the available characterization tools .  
2. Provide students with the knowledge and skills needed to conduct laboratory research, 
understand instrument design and analyze instrumental results. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Have clear understanding of different analytical instruments.  
2. Experimental verification of fundamental concept 
3. Application of spectroscopic techniques as analytical tool in chemistry. 
 
Course Content 
1. Chromatographic Techniques (GC and HPLC) in Organic Analysis 
2. Fluorescence Spectroscopy and its application 
3. Synthesis techniques and laboratory practices  
4. OriginPro Data Analysis and Plotting of graphs 
5. MERCURY and ENCIFER Crystal structure viewing 
6. MATLAB for data analysis: basic plotting techniques; curve fitting; and simple linear 
programming;  
7. Chem Draw for drawing molecular structures 
8. Mathematica for mathematical data handling 
9. Technical communication - presentation, literature search 
10. Scifinder for literature search 
11. Analysis and identification of organic compounds by 1H NMR, Mass spectrometry and IR  
12. Modeling of intermediate and transition state of organic reactions 
 
Text Books: 
1. Halpern, A. M.; McBane, G. C. Experimental Physical Chemistry: A laboratory Text Book, 
3rd ed. W. H. Freeman, 2006. 
 
Reference Book:  
1. Hunt, B. R. et al., A guide to MATLAB: For beginners and experienced user, 2nd Edition, 
University Press, Cambridge, 2006 
2. ChemDraw user guide: http://media.cambridgesoft.com/support/15/ChemDrawHelp.pdf 
3. McMahon, D, A & Topa, D. M., A beginners guide to Mathematica, Chapman & Hall/CRC, 
2006.   
 
 
 
 
56 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Master of Science (MSc) Program  
in  
Mathematics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
57 
 
 
(1) Introduction: 
The classical mathematics provides foundations for analysis of key principles behind 
modern and emergent technologies, modern mathematics coupled with computational 
capabilities is opening new avenues for further explorations. M. Sc. (Mathematics) 
Program at IIT Jodhpur aims at tapping these opportunities by developing workforce 
specialized in mathematics needed for developing key technologies. The proposed four 
semester program strives to provide balance between analysis and appli cation of 
Mathematics. The compulsory courses provide the basic understanding and foundation of 
mathematics enhancing analytic capabilities of the students. Students can further 
explore their area of interest with program and open elective courses. The pro ject 
component spread over last two semesters provides research exposure to the students 
and provides an opportunity to apply their mathematical skills to solve real -life 
problems. Students are encouraged to undertake research Summer Internships in 
Institute of repute, Industry and R&D organizations. 
 
(2) Objectives of the Program: 
M.Sc. program in Mathematics at IIT Jodhpur is offered with the objective of tapping 
opportunities for nurturing motivated students in the frontline areas and well trained 
workforce for Academia and Industry. The Program also strives to provide a vibrant 
environment to support independent thinking and developing the spirit of team work. 
 
(3) Expected Graduate Attributes: 
(1) Skill set to analyze abstract mathematical structures. 
(2) Understanding about the recent areas in pure and applied mathematics such as 
algebra, analysis, statistics and computation. 
(3) Ability to formulate mathematics from computational aspect.  
(4) Knowledge and capability to develop and apply mathematical models for real life 
problems. 
(5) Skill set to understand the abstraction of mathematical structures. 
(6) Analytical and scientific skill set to pursue higher studies and research in diverse 
areas of mathematics. 
(7) Ability to express ideas in the written and oral formats. 
 
(4) Learning Outcomes: 
(1) Understanding of fundamental aspects of real, complex and functional analysis. 
(2) Basic understanding of linear and abstract algebra. 
(3) Knowledge about basics and use of probability theory, statistics and differential 
equations. 
(4) Skill set to cater computational aspects using programming techniques. 
(5) Basic understanding of symbolic solution tools such as MATLAB or Mathematica. 
(6) Demonstrate skills to communicate scientific ideas and/or application systems.  
58 
 
(7) Acquire project management skills. 
(5) Program Structure: 
 
Cat. Course 
Number 
Course Title L-T-P-
D 
Credits  Cat. Course 
Number 
Course Title L-T-P-
D 
Credits 
Semester 1  Semester 2 
C MAL6XX0 Linear 
algebra 
3-0-0-
1 
4  C MAL6XX0 Abstract 
Algebra 
3-0-0-1 4 
C MAL6XX0 Real analysis 3-0-0-
1 
4  C MAL5XX0 Complex  
Analysis 
3-0-0-1 4 
C MAL6XX0 Ordinary 
Differential 
equations 
3-0-0-
1 
4  C MAL6XX0 Partial 
Differential 
equations 
3-0-0-0 3 
C MAL5XX0 Probability 
and 
Statistics 
3-0-0-
1 
4  C MAL6XX0 Functional 
analysis 
3-0-0-0 3 
C MAL5XX0 Programming 
Techniques 
2-0-2-
0 
3  PE Xxxxx PE1 3-0-0-0 3 
      C MA5XX0 Data 
Structures and 
Algorithms 
1-0-2-0 2 
Total 19  Total 19 
 
Semester 3  Semester 4 
C MAL6XX0 Topology 3-0-0-
0 
3  PE Xxxxx PE5 3-0-0-0 3 
PE Xxxxx PE2 3-0-0-
0 
3  PE Xxxxx PE6 3-0-0-0 3 
PE Xxxxx PE3 3-0-0-
0 
3  OE Xxxxx OE2 3-0-0-0 3 
PE Xxxxx PE4 3-0-0-
0 
3       
OE Xxxxx OE1 3-0-0-
0 
3       
P MAP7XX0   Project 0-0-0-
5 
5  P MAP7XX0   Project 0-0-
0-10 
10 
Total 20  Total 19 
Grand total 77 
 
S.No. Category Course 
Category Title 
Total 
Courses 
Total 
Credits 
1 C Compulsory 11 38 
2 PE Program Electives 6 18 
3 OE Open Elective 2 6 
4 P Project 2 15 
Total  77 
 
 
 
(6) Topic Cloud 
Compulsory Topics: 
(a) Linear Algebra (Finite dimensional Vector Spaces, linear transformations, Inner 
Product Spaces, Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors, Jordan canonical forms, Matrix 
theory, Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors, Spectral Analysis) 
59 
 
(b) Real Analysis (Basic properties of real system, study of Metric spaces, Calculus of 
several variables, Function spaces), Abstract Algebra (Basic algebraic structures, 
group theory, ring theory, Galois Theory) 
(c) Topology (Topological structures and their properties, transformation between 
topological spaces), Functional Analysis (Normed linear spaces, Banach spaces, Lp 
Spaces, Hilbert Spaces, Linear transformations and their properties) 
(d) Complex Analysis (Fundamental theorem of Complex Analysis, Residue theorem, 
Contour integration and its applications, evaluation of Improper integrals, conformal 
mappings) 
(e) Probability theory (Univariate and multi -variate Probability Distributions and their 
properties, weak laws of large numbers, central limit theorem). 
(f) Statistics (sampling distributions, estimation of parameters, interval estimation, 
testing of hypotheses), Statistical modelling (Estimation of par ameters, Interval 
estimation, Testing of hypotheses) 
(g) Ordinary Differential Equations (Existence and Uniqueness of solution, Sturm-
Liouville problems and properties of its solutions) 
(h) Partial differential equations and their applications 
(i) Fundamentals of Programming 
(j) Numerical Techniques (Root finding methods, Solution for system of linear 
equations, Power method), Solution to System of linear Equations, Interpolation, 
Numerical solution of Ordinary Differential Equations. 
 
Elective Topics: 
Fourier analysis, Wavelets analysis, Dynamical Systems, Operations Research, Number 
Theory, Calculus of Variations, Integral Equations, Statistical Inference, Graphs Theory, 
Stochastic Calculus, Measure and Integration, Chaos Theory, Numerical Methods for 
Partial Differential Equations, Discrete Mathematics. 
 
 
 
(7) List of Electives 
 
(a) Department of Mathematics 
 MAL7XX0: Measure and Integration 
 MAL7XX0: Financial Engineering 
 MAL7XX0: Wavelets analysis and Applications   
 MAL7XX0: Dynamical Systems 
 MAL7XX0: Optimization 
 MAL7XX0: Numerical Analysis 
 MAL7XX0: Number Theory 
 MAL7XX0: Statistical Inference 
 MAL7XX0: Graph Theory 
 MAL7XX0: Calculus of Variation and Integral Equations 
 MAL7XX0: Stochastic Calculus  
 MAL7XX0: Algebraic Number Theory 
 MAL7XX0: Machine Learning and Pattern Recognition 
 MAL7XX0: Chaos Theory and its Applications 
 MAL7XX0: Representations of finite groups 
 MAL8XX0: Numerical Partial Differential Equations 
 MAL7XX0: Selected Topics in Mathematics - I (1-0-0-0) 
 MAL7XX0: Selected Topics in Mathematics - II (2-0-0-0) 
 MAL7XX0: Selected Topics in Mathematics - III (3-0-0-0) 
60 
 
 
(b) From sister Departments 
 Theory of Vibrations 
 Finite Element Methods in Engineering 
 Incompressible Fluid Flow 
 Computer Graphics 
 Advanced Computer Graphics 
 Digital Image Analysis 
 Statistical Signal Analysis 
 Statistical Decision Theory 
 Computational Imaging 
 Multimedia Communication 
 Classical Mechanics 
 Quantum Mechanics 
 Statistical Physics 
 Introduction to Quantum Technologies 
  
61 
 
(8) Content of compulsory courses: 
 
Course Title Linear Algebra Course No. MAL6XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-1[4] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
1. To give sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by students for 
further applications in their respective domains of interest. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Concept of linear spaces, mapping between spaces, norm and their action on 
spaces. 
2. Eigenvalues, eigenvectors and diagonalization, and Primary decomposition 
theorem. 
3. Normal operators and Spectral theory of real symmetric normal operators. 
 
Contents 
Vector Spaces, Matrices and System of Linear Equations [10 Lectures] : System of 
linear equations,Matrices and rank, Vector Spaces over fields, Subspaces, Bases and 
dimension, Direct sum of the sub spaces. 
 
Linear Transformation and Inner Product Spaces [10 Lectures] : Linear 
Transformations, Rank and Nullity theorem, Representation of linear transformations 
by matrices, duality and transpose. Inner product spaces, Gram -Schmidt 
orthonormalization, orthogonal projections. 
 
Operators and Spectral Theorem [20 Lectures] :Linear functionals and adjoints, 
Hermitian, self -adjoint, Unitary and normal operators, Spectral theorem for real 
operators, Eigenvalues, Eigenvectors, Characteristic polynomials, minimal polynomial s, 
Cayley Hamilton Theorem, triangulation, diagonalization, Jordan canonical forms 
(without proof). 
 
Textbook  
1. Hoffman, K., and Kunze R., Linear Algebra,  Pearson Education (India) 2003. 
2. Herstein, I.N., Topics in Algebra, 2nd Edn., John Wiley and Sons. 
3. Lax, P., Linear Algebra and its applications, John Wiley & Sons, Indian Edition 1997 
4. Lang, S., Linear Algebra, 3rd Edition, Springer, 2004. 
 
Reference Books  
1. Artin, M., Algebra, Prentice Hall of India, 1994. 
2. Axler, S., (1997), Linear Algebra Done Right. 
3. Kumaresan, S., (2000) Linear Algebra – A Geometric Approach, PHI Learning. 
4. Sharma, R. K., Shah, S. K. and Shankar, A. G., Algebra I: A Basic Course in 
Algebra, Pearson Education, 2011. 
 
Online course Material  
1. Rana, I.K., Basic Linear Algebra, NPTEL Course material, Department of 
Mathematics, IIT Bombay,  https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111101115/ 
 
 
 
 
 
62 
 
Course Title Real Analysis Course No. MAL6XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-1[4] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
1. To train the student in the area of real analysis 
2. To give sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by student for 
further applications in their respective domains of interest 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Metric spaces, completeness and Baire Category. 
2. Continuity, Uniform continuity, Contraction mapping, fixed point theorem.  
3. Connectedness and Compactness and Heine-Borel theorem. 
4. Function spaces, Weiestrass approximation theorem. 
 
Contents 
Real Number System, Limits and Continuity  [10 Lectures]:  Countable and uncountable 
sets, the axiom of choice, Zorn‟s lemma, Real number system, Consequences of 
completeness property, limit and continuity of functions, uniform continuity.   
Metric Spaces [10 Lectures] : Metric spaces, continuous and uniformly continuous 
functions, bounded and totally bounded sets, Compactness, Heine -Borel Theorem, 
Completeness, Cantor‟s Intersection theorem, Baire spaces, Connectedness.  
Sequences and Series of Functions: [10 Lectures] Sequences and Series of functions, 
Uniform convergence, Uniform convergence and integration, Uniform convergence and 
differentiation,  
Multivariable Calculus [10 Lectures] : Functions of several variables, continuity, 
differentiability, partial derivatives, Jacobian, Inverse Function Theorem and the Implicit 
Function Theorem, multivariable integration, Fubini‟s theorem, Change of variables, Line 
integrals, surface integrals, Green‟s theorem, Divergence theorem, Stokes theorem, and 
applications. 
 
Textbook 
1. Aliprantis, C.D., and Burkinshaw, O., Principles of Real Analysis, 3rd Edition. 
2. Apostol, T., Mathematical Analysis, 2nd Edition, Narosa, 2002. 
3. Ghorpade, S.R., and Limaye, B.V., A Course in Multivariable Calculus and Analysis, 
Springer. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Royden, H. L., Real Analysis, Third Edition, Macmillan Publishing Company, 1988. 
2. Rudin, W., Priciples of Mathematical Analysis, Third Edition, McGraw-Hill, 1976. 
3. Davidson, K. R., and Donsig, A. P., Real analysis and applications: Theory in 
practice, Springer Publications, 2010. 
4. Bartle, R., Sherbert, D., Introduction to Real Analysis, 3rd Edition, Wiley 2011. 
 
Online course Material  
1. Kulkarni, S.H., Real Analysis, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mathematics, 
IIT Madras,  https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111106053/ 
 
 
 
 
 
63 
 
Course Title Ordinary Differential Equations Course No. MAL6XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-1[4] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
1. Introduce the concepts of existence and uniqueness of solution of ordinary 
differential equations 
2. Develop analytical techniques to solve ordinary differential equations 
3. Understand the properties of solution of ordinary differential equations 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Understanding existence, uniqueness, and other properties of a solution of 
ordinary differential equations 
2. Solving ordinary differential equations with series method, Green's function 
method 
3. Solving systems of ODEs, and characterization of their solutions 
 
Contents 
Motivations and origins, Existence-Uniqueness [7 Lectures]: Existence of solutions by 
Picard‟s method, uniqueness and continuous dependence w.r.t. initial conditions and 
parameters, continuation of solutions, existence  and uniqueness of solutions to 
system of differential equations. 
 
Second Order Linear Equations [23 Lectures] : General solution of differential 
equations using method of undetermined coefficients, method of variation of 
parameters, variable coefficients equations, Power series solution method, Legendre‟s 
equation, Frobenius method, Bessel‟s equation, Green's function method, Sturm -
Liouville problems, orthogonal eigen -function expansions, Sturm comparison theorem, 
Sturm separation theorem, 
 
Systems of Differential Equations [10 Lectures]: Phase plane method, critical points of 
the system and their stability analysis, algebraic properties of solutions, the 
eigenvalue-eigenvector method of finding solutions, fundamental matrix solutions,  
matrix exponential, nonhomogeneous equations. 
 
Text Books 
1. Ross, S. L., Introduction to ordinary differential equations, 4th Ed., John Wiley 
Publications, 1989 
2. Braun. M., Differential Equations and Their Applications, 3rd  Ed., Springer-Verlag, 
1983 
3. Chicone, C., Ordinary Differential Equations with Applications, 2nd  Ed., Springer, 
2006 
 
Reference Books 
1. Coddington, E. A., An Introduction to Ordinary Differential Equations, PHI 
Learning 1999 
2. Birkhoff, G. and Rota G., Ordinary Differential Equations, 4th Ed., Wiley 
Publications, 1989 
3. Simmons, G., Differential Equations with Applications and Historical Notes, 2nd 
Ed., McGraw Hill Education, 2017 
 
Online Course Material 
1. Agrawal, P. N. and Pandey, D. N., Ordinary and partial differential equations and 
applications, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mathematics, IITRoorkee, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107111/ 
64 
 
2. Raghavendra V., Ordinary differential equations, NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Mathematics, IIT Kanpur,https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111104031/ 
 
 
 
  
65 
 
Course Title Probability and Statistics Course No. MAL5XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-1[4] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
1. Demonstrate an understanding of the basic principles of probability theory. 
2. Use of the properties of discrete and continuous random variables with their 
joint, marginal, and conditional distributions. 
3. Use of the various families of probability distributions to model various types of 
data. 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Understanding of probability theory and statistics to solve industrial problems. 
2. Understanding of random sampling, theory of estimation and testing of 
hypotheses. 
 
Contents: 
Probability spaces and Random Variables [15 lectures] : Probability measure, 
conditional probability, Bayes‟ theorem, Random variable, cumulative distribution 
function and its properties, probability density function, functions of a random 
variable, standard discrete and continuous distributions and their applications, 
Transformation, moments, Chebychev‟s inequality. 
Joint Distributions [10 lectures] : Random vectors, joint, marginal and conditional 
distributions, conditional expectatio n, independence, correlation and regression, Bi -
variate normal distribution, functions of random vectors, transformation. 
Limit Theorems[3 lectures]: Convergence of sequences of random variables, weak and 
strong laws of large numbers, central limit theorems. 
Estimation and Tests of Hypotheses[14 lectures]: Sampling distributions, estimation of 
parameters, maximum likelihood method and method of moments, interval estimation, 
testing of hypotheses. 
 
Text Books 
1. Rohatgi, V. K., and Saleh, A. K. M. E., An Introduction to Probability and 
Statistics, Second Edition, Wiley India, 2000. 
2. Casella, G. and Berger, R. (2002). Statistical Inference, Cengage Learning. 
3. Hoel, P.G., Port, S.C. and Stone, C.J. (1971). Introduction to Probability Theory, 
Houghton Mifflin Series in Statistics. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Hogg, R. V., McKean J. W., and Craig A., Introduction to Mathematical Statistics, 
Sixth Edition, Pearson Education India, 2006. 
2. Prakasa Rao, B. L., S., A First Course in Probability and Statistics, World 
Scientific/Cambridge University Press India, 2009. 
3. Castaneda, L. B., Arunachalam, V., and Dharmaraja, S., Introduction to 
probability and stochastic processes with Applications. Wiley, 2012 
 
Online Course Material: 
1. Kumar, S., Probability and Statistics, NP TEL Course Material, Department of 
Mathematics, IIT Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111105090/ 
 
 
 
 
66 
 
Title Programing techniques Number MAL5XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 2–0–2-0 
[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. introduce the basics of computer programming in C/C++. 
2. Teach to develop well-structured programs in C/C++. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Write well structures programs in C/C++. 
2. Implement and solve algebraic and transcendental equations and system of 
equations numerically. 
Contents  
 
 
  
Introduction[2 Lectures]:machine language, assembly language, high-level programming 
languages, compiler, interpreter, loader, linker, and flowchart. 
 
Basic features of programming (Using C/C++) [8 Lectures] :Data types, variables, 
operators, expressions, control structures, functions, parameter passing conventions.  
 
Advanced features of pr ogramming [8 Lectures] : Pointers, arrays, operations on data 
(Insert, delete, search, traverse and modify), structures, introduction to classes. 
 
Root finding methods [4 Lectures] : Bisection method, Secant method, the method of 
false position, Newton-Raphson method. 
 
Solution of system of linear equations [6 Lectures] : Gauss elimination, Gauss -Jordan 
method, LU decomposition, Crout's Method, Do -little Method, and Cholesky 
decomposition. 
 
Textbooks  
1. Balaguruswamy, E., Programming in ANSI C, Tata McGraw-Hill, 2004. 
2. Lafore, R., Object-Oriented  Programming in C++, Fourth Edition, Pearson, 2002. 
3. Burden,  R. L., Numerical Analysis, Ninth Edition, Cengage Learning India, 2012. 
Reference Books  
1. Schildt, H., C: The Complete Reference, Fourth Edition, Tata McGraw Hill, 2000. 
2. Datta,  B. N., Numerical Linear Algebra and Applications, 2nd Edition, PHI, 2010. 
Online Course Material  
1. Kumar, S.A., Principles of Programming Languages, NPT EL Course Material, 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Delhi, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106102067/.   
2. Gupta, D., Introduction to Problem Solving and Programming, NPTEL Course 
Material, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Kanpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106104074/. 
3. Nayak,  A. K. and Kumar S., Numerical methods, NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Mathematics, IIT Roorkee, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107105/. 
 
 
 
67 
 
Course Title Abstract Algebra Course No. MAL6XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-1[4] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
1. To train the student in the domain of Abstract Algebra. 
2. To give sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by student for 
further applications in their respective domains of interest.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Modules, Dual modules, Cyclic Primary modules and Decomposition theorem. 
2. Nilpotent and Solvable groups, Galois Theory, splitting Fields, Normal extension, 
Fundamental theorem of Galois theory  
 
Contents: 
 
Group Theory [10 lectures]:  Review of Group theory (Symmetric Groups, 
Transformation Groups), Abelian groups, Sylow Theorems, nilpotent and solvable 
groups. 
 
Ring Theory [11 lectures] : Rings, Polynomial Rings, Prime ideals, Maximal Ideals, 
Principal Ideal Domain, Unique Factorization domain, Euclidian Algorithm.  
 
Field extensions [5 lectures]: Finite extension, algebraic extensions. 
 
Galois Theory [16 lectures] : Galois Theory, splitting Fields, Normal extension, 
Fundamental Theorem of Galois Theory and its applications. 
 
 
Text Book 
1. Cohn, P. M., Basic algebra: Groups, rings and fields, 2 Ed., Springer, 2005 
2. Jacobson, N., Basic Algebra I, Dover Publication, 2009 
3. Jacobson, N., Basic Algebra II, Dover Publication, 2012 
 
Reference Books 
1. Artin, M., Algebra, Second Edition, Pearson, 2010 
4. Dummit, D. S. and Foote, R. M., Abstract algebra, 3 Ed., Wiley, 2004 
5. Stewart, I., Galois Theory, Third Edition, Chapman and Hall, 2003 
 
Online Course Material: 
1. Gross, B., Abstract Algebra, Online Course Material, Harvard Extension School, 
http://matterhorn.dce.harvard.edu/engage/ui/index.html#/1999/01/82345 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
68 
 
Course Title Complex Analysis Course No. MAL5XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-1[4] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
1. To train the student in the area of complex analysis. 
2. To give sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by student for 
further applications in their respective domains of interest. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Cauchy-Riemann Equations, Homotopy of paths. 
2. Cauchy-Goursat theorem and Cauchy‟s Integral Formula. 
3. Evaluation of improper integrals. 
 
Contents 
 
Introduction to functions of complex variables  [14 Lectures] : Elementary functions, 
continuity, differentiability, Analytic Functions, Cauchy Riemann Equations. 
 
Complex Integration [14 Lectures] : Line and Contour Integrals, anti -derivatives of a 
complex function, Cauchy-Goursat Theorem, Simply and multiply connected domains, 
Cauchy‟s Integral formula, Taylor and Laurent Series expansion, Liouville‟s Theorem, 
Fundamental Theorem of Algebra, Maximum modulus principle. 
 
Residue Theory[10 Lectures] Residues and poles, Cauchy‟s residue theorem, Jordan‟s 
Theorem, evaluation of Improper integrals 
 
Conformal mappings [4 Lectures] : Conformal mapping, Special transformation, 
Mobious transformation. 
 
Text Books 
1. Lang, S., Complex Analysis, Fourth Edition, Springer-Verlag, 1999 
2. Brown, J. W. and Churchill, R. V., Complex variables and applications, 9 Ed., 
McGraw Hill Publications, 2013 
 
Reference Books 
1. Ahlfors, L.V., Complex Analysis, 3rd edition, McGraw Hill, 2000. 
2. Ablowitz, M. J., and Fokas, A. S., Complex variables: Introduction and 
applications, 2 Ed., Cambridge University Press, 2003. 
3. Shastri, A.R., An Introduction to Complex Analysis, Macmillan India, New Delhi, 
1999. 
 
Online Resources 
1. Sree Krishna, P.A.S., Complex Analysis, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Mathematics, IIT Guwahati,  https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111103070/ 
2. Swaminathan, A. and Katiyar, V.K. Complex Analysis, NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Mathematics, IIT Roorkee,  
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107056/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
69 
 
Course Title Partial Differential 
Equations 
Course No. MAL6XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
1. Introduce the concepts of existence and uniqueness of solution of partial differential 
equations 
2. Develop analytical techniques to solve partial differential equations 
3. Understand the properties of solution of partial differential equations 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Understanding existence, uniqueness, and other properties of a solution of partial 
differential equations 
2. Solving partial differential equations with Fourier series method, Green's function 
method,  Laplace transform method, and Fourier transform method 
 
Contents 
 
Motivations and origins [3 Lectures]:  PDEs of engineering and physics (Heat, wave and 
Laplace equations). 
 
First order partial differential equations [9 Lectures] : Linear, quasi -linear and fully 
nonlinear equations, Lagrange method, the Cauchy p roblem, Cauchy method of 
characteristics, compatible systems, Charpit method.  
 
Second order partial differential equations [12 Lectures] : Classification and Canonical 
forms, Adjoint operators, Riemann‟s method, solving linear partial differential equation s 
with constant coefficients. 
 
Elliptic, parabolic and hyperbolic equations[16 Lectures]: Variable separation method for 
Laplace/Poisson equation, heat conduction equation, wave equation, Burger equation,  
D‟Alembert‟s solution,  Maximum -Minimum principles, Duhamel‟s principle, solutions by 
Green‟s function method. 
 
Text Books 
1. Rao, K. S., Introduction to partial differential equations, 3rd Edition, PHI, 2011 
2. Logan, J. D., Applied partial differential equations, 3rd  Ed., Springer, 2015 
3. Pinchover, Y. and Rubinstein, J., An introduction to partial differential equations, 
Cambridge University Press, 2005 
 
Reference Books 
1. Sneddon, I. N., Elements of Partial Differential Equations, McGraw-Hill, New 
York,1986 
2. Prasad, P. And Ravindran, R.,  Partial differential equations, New Age 
International Publisher, 2005 
3. Mattheij, R. M. M., Rienstra, S. W., and ten Thije Boonkkamp, J. H. M., Partial 
Differential Equations: Modeling, Analysis, Computation, SIAM Publication, 2005 
 
Online Course Material  
1. Agrawal, P. N. and Pandey D.N., Ordinary and partial differential equations and 
applications, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mathematics, IIT Roorkee, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107111/ 
2. Sinha, R. K., Partial differential equations, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Mathematics, IIT Guwahati, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111103021/ 
70 
 
Title Functional Analysis Number MAL6XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 
[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
1. To introduce the area of Functional analysis. 
2. To give sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by student for further 
applications in their respective domains of interest. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. Basic idea of a normed linear spaces and operators on normed linear space. 
2. Open Mapping theorem, Hahn-Banach Theorem and their applications. 
 
Contents  
Normed Linear Spaces [14 Lectures]: Normed linear space, subspace of a normed linear 
space, Equivalent norms, Finite Dimensional normed linear spaces, Banach spaces, 
Linear operator, norm of a linear operator, boundedness and continuity, Quotient spaces.  
 
Integrability and Extensi on Theorems [19 Lectures] : Integrable functions, l_p spaces, 
Minkowski's inequality, Holder's inequality, separability of l_p spaces, uniformly bounded 
operator, principle of uniform boundedness, Sub -linear functional, Semi -norm, Open 
mapping theorem, Close d graph theorem, Hahn -Banach Theorem, dual of a normed 
linear space, reflexive normed linear space. 
 
Hilbert Spaces and their Applications [9 Lectures]: Inner product spaces, polarisation 
identity, Bessel's inequality, Hilbert space, Riesz representation theorem, Operators on 
Hilbert spaces, compact operators, projections and idempotents.  
 
Text Books  
1. Limaye, B. V., Functional Analysis, Second Edition, New Age International, 1996 
2. Lax, P. D., Functional Analysis, First Edition, 2001 
3. Ruddin, W., Functional Analysis, 2nd Ed., McGraw Hill Education, 2017 
 
Reference Books  
1. Conway, J. B., A course in Functional Analysis, Second Edition, Springer -Verlag, 
1994 
2. Goffman, C., and Pedrick, G., A First Course in Functional Analysis, Prentice -Hall, 
1974 
 
Online Course Material  
1. Srivastava, P. D., Functional Analysis,  NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Mathematics, IIT Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/111105037/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
71 
 
Course Title Data Structures and Algorithms Course No. MAP5XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 1–0–2-0 [2] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
1. To provide sufficient skills to prove and analyze efficiency of the algorithms.  
2. To introduce elementary data structures and related operations. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Ability to design correct programs to solve problems.  
2. Skills to choose efficient data structures and apply them to solve problems. 
3.  Ability to show the correctness and efficiency of a program. 
 
 
Contents 
 
Performance of algorithms [3 lectures] : Algorithm Development, Complexity analysis 
and asymptotics.  
 
Data structures [11 lectures] : Arrays, pointers, linked lists, stacks, queues, binary 
trees, tree traversals.  
 
A programming laboratory will be set in consonance with the topics covered in 
lectures. This will include assignments in a programming language like C and C++ in 
GNU Linux environment. 
 
 
Text Books 
1. Cormen, T.H., Leiserson, C.E., Rivest, R.L. and Stein, C., Introduction to 
Algorithms, 2nd Ed.,Prentice-Hall of India, 2007. 
2. Sahni, S., Data Structures, Algorithms and Applications in C++, 2nd Ed., 
Universities Press, 2005. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Aho, A. V., Ullman, J. D., and Hopcroft, J. E. (1985), Data Structures and 
Algorithms, Addison-Wesley.  
2. Goodrich, M.T. and Tamassia, R., Data Structures and Algorithms in Java, Wiley, 
2006. 
 
Online course material 
1. Garg, N., Data Structures And Algorithms, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Delhi, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106102064/. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
72 
 
Title Topology Number MAL6XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 
[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
1. To train the students in the domain of Topology. 
2. To give sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by student for further 
applications in their respective domains of interest. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. Topological spaces, order topology and product topology. 
2. Separation axioms, countability axioms Urysohn‟s metrization theorem. 
3. Function spaces, pointwise and uniform convergence, Stone-Weierstrass Theorem.  
 
Contents  
 
Basic Topology [14 Lectures]: Topological spaces, basis and sub -basis, order topology, 
product topology, subspace topology, convergence, closed sets, continuous functions, 
quotient topology  
 
Properties of Topological Spaces [17 Lectures]: Connected spaces, Components, local 
connectedness, compact spaces, limit point compactness, local compactness, 
Countability axioms, separation axioms, normal spaces, Tychonoff spaces, Urysohn‟s 
metrization theorem, Tietze extension theorem, Tychonoff theorem, Stone-Cech 
compactification 
 
Special Topi cs [09 Lectures] : Function spaces, pointwise and uniform convergence, 
compact-open topology, uniform convergence on compact set, Stone -Weierstrass 
Theorem. 
 
 
Text Books  
1. Munkres, J., Topology, second edition, Pearson Publications, 2000 
2. Willard, S., General Topology, Dover Publications, 2004 
 
Reference Books  
1. Pervin, W. J. and Boas, R. P., Foundations of general topology, Academic Press, 
1964 
2. Simmons, G. F., Introdunction to topology and modern analysis, Tata McGraw -
Hill, 2004 
 
Online Course Material  
1. Veeramani, P., Topology, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mathematics, IIT  
Madras, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111106054/. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
73 
 
(9) Content of Elective courses: 
 
Title Measure and Integration Number MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D 
[C] 
3–0–0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
1. Provide background in the area of Measure Theory. 
2. Provide sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by students for 
further applications in their respective domains of interest. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
1.  Provide basic understanding of the measures, total variation, absolute continuity, 
and Radon-Nikodym Theorem. 
2.  Impart knowledge in Derivatives of measures, Fundamental Theorem, product 
measures, Fubini‟s Theorem, convolutions, Distribution functions. 
 
Contents  
 
Basics of Measure and Integration [12 Lectures] : Riemann Integration and need for 
generalization, Measurable Sets, measurable functions, functions between measurable 
spaces, Measures on Algebra of Sets, Extension Theorems, Lebesgue and Lebesgue -
Stieltjes measure, Measure, measure spaces. 
 
Integrability [14 Lectures] : Simple functions and their integrals, integral of a non -
negative measurable function, integral of extended real valued non -negative function, 
Monotone Convergence Theorem, Fatou‟s lemma, Integrable functions, Lebesgue 
Dominated Convergence T heorem, Lebesgue Spaces L_p, Holder‟s Inequality, 
Minkowski‟s Inequality, completeness theorem, L_{\infinity}. 
 
Modes of convergence [6 Lectures] : Relations between convergence almost 
everywhere, convergence in measure and convergence in L_p spaces, Egorof f‟s 
Theorem. 
 
Special Theorems (without proof) [14 Lectures]: Hahn Decomposition Theorem, Jordan 
Decomposition Theorem, Radon -Nikodym Theorem, Lebesgue Decomposition 
Theorem, Riesz Representation Theorem for L_p spaces. 
 
Textbook  
1. Royden, H.L., (1988), Real analysis, 3 rd Edition, Macmillan Publishing Company, 
New York 
2. Bartle,R.G., (2014), The Elements of Integration and Lebesgue Measure, John 
Wiley & Sons 
3.  Inder K.Rana, (2007), An Introduction to Measure and Integration, Narosa. 
 
Reference Books  
1. Parthasarathy, K.R., 2005, Introduction to Probability and Measure, TRIM Series, 
Vol. 33, Hindustan book agency, New Delhi. 
2. Halmos, P.R., 1976, Measure Theory, 1st Edition, Springer. 
  
Online Course Material  
1. Rana, I.K., Measure Theory, NPTEL Course Mat erial, Department of Mathematics, 
IIT Bombay, https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc17_ma15/ 
74 
 
 
Title Financial Engineering Number MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA) Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
1. Securities Pricing Securities, Risk Management Assessment, prediction and decision 
making, under uncertainty, regarding future events and their consequences 
2. Portfolio Optimization Balancing risk and return 
3. Modeling Pricing of derivatives and Itos calculus 
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. Valuation of financial portfolio 
2. Pricing of financial derivatives (options and contracts) 
3. Understanding risk and return 
 
Contents  
 
[18 lectures]: Introduction to financial markets and financial instruments, financial 
derivatives, risk and return, risky and risk free assets, interest rates, bonds, bonds pricing, 
spot and forward rates, investment portfolio, mean -variance analysis, capital asset prici ng 
model, arbitrage pricing theory. 
 
[22 lectures]: Discrete time models, stock and money market models, principle of no 
arbitrage, pricing of contracts (forward and future), options, put -call parity, option pricing, 
martingales, Binomial model, CRR model, Black-Scholes formula, Greeks, random walk, 
Brownian motion, stochastic process, Itos integral and Ito-Deoblins formula. 
 
Textbook  
1. M. Capinski and T. Zastawniak, Mathematics for finance: an introduction to financial 
engineering, Springer, 2010.  
2. S.N. Neftci, Principles of financial engineering. Academic Press/Elsevier, 2009. 
 
Reference Books  
1. J.C. Hull, Options, futures and other derivatives. Pearson India, 2011. 
2. S.E. Shreve, Stochastic calculus for finance I: The binomial asset pricing model, 
Springer, 2000. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
75 
 
 
Course Title Wavelet Analysis and Applications Course No. MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/PhD (MA) Type Elective 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
1. To introduce the origin of wavelet transform 
2. To develop the understanding of multiresolution analysis for different types of 
signals 
3. To equip the students with various possible applications of the wavelet transform 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Strong understanding of Fourier and wavelet transform. 
2. Answer to the question why wavelet transform is a better tool for signal analysis. 
3. Implement and apply wavelet transform for various applications. 
 
Contents 
Fourier Analysis [12 Lectures] : Fourier and inverse Fourier transforms, Gabor 
transform, short time Fourier transform and the uncertainty principle. 
 
Wavelet Analysis [18 Lectures] : Mother wavelet, orthogonal and biorthogonal 
wavelets, continuous and discrete wavelet transform, basic properties of wavelet 
transforms, multiresolution analysis, Haar wavelet transform, Dabuchies Wavelet 
Transform, wave-packet transform 
 
Applications [12 Lectures]: Application of wavelet theory to feature detection, image 
denoising and compression. 
 
Text Books 
1. Chui, C. K., An Introduction to Wavelets, Academic Press Inc., New York, 1992. 
2. Debnath, L., Wavelet Transforms and Their Applications, Birkhauser, 2002. 
3. Mallat, S., A Wavelet Tour of Signal Processing, Academic Press, 1999. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Daubechies, I., Ten Lectures on Wavelets, Society for Industrial and Applied 
Mathematics, Philadelphia, PA, 1992 
2. Akansu, A.N.,  and Haddad, R.A.,  Multiresolution  signal Decomposition: 
Transforms, Subbands and Wavelets, Academic Press, Oranld, Florida, 1992 
3. Kaiser, G., A Friendly Guide to Wavelets, Birkhauser, New York, 1995. 
 
Online course Material  
1. Gadre, V.M., Fundamentals of Wavelets, Filter Banks and Time Frequency 
Analysis, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mathematics, IIT Bombay, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108101093/. 
2. Strang, G. and Amaratunga, K., Wavelets, Filter Banks and Applications, Online 
Course Material, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,  
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/mathematics/18-327-wavelets-filter-banks-and-
applications-spring-2003/.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
76 
 
Course Title Optimization Techniques Course No. MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/PhD (MA) Type Elective 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
1. To train the student in the domain of linear and non-linear programming 
2. To give sufficient tools for solving programming problems which can be used by 
student for further applications in different areas of interest. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Simplex method, Charne‟s M-method, Two-phase Method 
2. Duality and Integer programming problem 
3. Transportation problem, assignment Problem, Karmakar‟s Algorithm and Wolf‟s 
method 
4. Newton‟s method, Conjugate direction method and Quasi-Newton methods 
5. KKT conditions, penalty and Barrier Methods, exact penalty functions  
 
Contents 
Linear Programming [23 lectures]: Linear combination of vectors, Convex set, Convex 
hull, Linear programming problem, feasible solution, basic feasible solution, graphical 
solution,  Simplex method Charne‟s M method, Two phase method, Solving system of 
equations and finding the inverse of  a matrix using simplex method, duality, 
Complementary Slackness Theorem, Duality and Simplex method, dual simplex 
algorithm, Integer Programming, Gomory‟s cut -constraint method, Branch and Bound 
method, Transportation problem, Assignment problem, application of optimization.  
 
Nonlinear Programming [19 lectures] : First and second order conditions, Iterative 
methods, line search methods, global convergence of descent algorithms, Newton‟s 
method, Conjugate direction method, Quasi -Newton Method, Constrained o ptimization 
- Lagrange Multipliers, Karush -Kuhn-Tucker conditions, Regular points, Sensitivity 
analysis, Quadratic Programming, Convex problems, applications of optimization. 
 
Text Book 
1. Luenberger, D. G., Linear and Nonlinear Programming, Yinyu Ye, Third  Edition, 
Springer, 2008.  
2. Kambo, N. S., Mathematical Programming Techniques,  Second Edition, Affiliated 
East West Press, 2005  
 
Reference Books 
1. Bazaraa, M. S., Sherali, H.D., and Shetty, C. M., Nonlinear Programming: Theory 
and Algorithms, Third Edition, Wiley publications, 2006 
2. Darst, R, Introduction to Linear Programming: Applications and Extensions, 
Dekker Publications, 1991 
 
Online Course Material: 
1. Goswami, A., Optimization, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mathematics, 
IIT Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111105039/1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
77 
 
Course Title Numerical Analysis Course No. MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Elective 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
1. Learn numerical techniques for a variety of mathematical problems 
2. Analyze the validity and error in the numerical results 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Develop an understanding of numerical error and applicability of a particular 
method. 
2. Solve numerically algebraic equations, linear systems of equations, ordinary 
differential equations and eigenvalue problems. 
3. Carry out numerical differentiation, integration, and interpolation 
Contents 
Errors analysis [4 Lectures] : Numerical Algorithms and errors, Floating point systems, 
Types of error, Propagation of Error, the stability of algorithms. 
Nonlinear equations [8 Lectures] : Newton -Raphson Method, Fixed -Point Iteration 
Method, Muller‟s method, criterion for acceptance of a root, Rates of Convergence. 
Numerical solution of linear system of equations [8 Lectures]: Ill- conditioned systems, 
iterative methods (Gauss-Seidel method, Gauss-Jacobi method), matrix inversion, Rate 
of Convergence, Rayleigh Quotient, Min -max princi ple, the power and inverse power 
methods for eigenvalue problems. 
Interpolation [8 Lectures] : Errors in polynomial interpolation, finite differences, 
Newton‟s formulae for interpolation, Lagrange interpolation formula, Hermite 
interpolation, Spline interpolation. 
Numerical Integration and Differentiation [6 Lectures] : Newton -Cotes integration 
formulae, Difference Formulae, Method of Undetermined Coefficients. 
Numerical IVPs for Ordinary Differential Equations [8 Lectures]: Taylor series method, 
Euler‟s Method, Modified Euler‟s Methods, Runge-Kutta Methods. 
Tools to be used: MATLAB, Mathematica, Octave, Scilab. 
 
Text Books 
1. Süli, E. and Mayers, D.F., An Introduction to Numerical Analysis, Cambridge Uni. 
Press, 2006. 
2. Sastry, S.S., Introductory Methods of Numerical Analysis, Prentice Hall of India 
Pvt. Ltd., 2007. 
3. Burden, R. L., Numerical Analysis, 9th Edition, Cengage Learning India, 2012 
 
Reference Books 
1. Conte, S.D. and Boor, C., Elementary Numerical Analysis: An Algorithmic 
Approach, Third Edition, McGraw-Hill Publication, 1980 
2. Chapra, S.C., Applied Numerical Methods with MATLAB for Engineers and 
Scientists, 3 Ed., McGraw Hill, 2012 
 
Online course Material  
1. Lal, R. and Banerjee S., Numerical Analysis, NPTEL Course Material, Department 
of Mathematics, IIT Roorkee,  https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107062/ 
2. Usha, R., Numerical Analysis, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Mathematics, IIT Madras, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111106101/ 
 
 
78 
 
Course Title Number Theory Course No. MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Elective 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
 1.To give basic knowledge of Number theory. 
 2. To equip students with number theoretic tools which can be used in their fields of 
interest. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
 1. Basic knowledge of Residue systems and RSA Cryptosystems. 
 2. Diophantine Equations, Pells Equation, Binary Quadratic Forms and their Applications.  
 
Contents 
Introduction [10 Lectures] : Divisibility, prime numbers, properties and their distribution, 
complete and reduced residue systems, theorems of Fermat, Euler & Wilson, application to 
RSA cryptosystem. 
Congruences [10 Lectures] : Linear congruences, Chinese Remainder theorem, quadratic 
congruences, and Quadratic Reciprocity law. 
Arithmetical functions [15 Lectures] : examples, properties and their rate of growth, 
Continued fractions, and their connections with Diophantine approximations, applications 
to linear and Pell‟s equations, Binary quadratic forms, Partition: basic properties and 
results. 
Diophatine equations [6 Lectures] : linear, quadratic and higher degree, some general 
equations. 
 
Text Books  
1. David M. Burton, Elementary Number Theory. McGraw Hill Education, 2012. 
2. G. H. Hardy and E. M. Wright. An Introduction to the Theory of Numbers. Oxford 
University Press, 1960. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Niven, H. S. Zuckerman and H. L. Montgomery. An Introduction to the Theory of 
Numbers, Wiley, 1991 
2. K. Ireland, and M. Rosen. A Classical Introduction to Modern Number Theory. GTM -
84, Springer, 1990. 
 
Online Resources 
1. Saikia, A., Number Theory, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mathematics, IIT 
Guwahati, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111103020/. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
79 
 
Title Statistical Inference Number MAL7XX0 
Departmet Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/Ph.D. (MA) Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
1. To provide background in the area of Statistics. 
2.  To provide sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by students for 
further applications in their respective domains of interest. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
1.  Basic understanding of the Point and Interval Estimation, Testing of Hypotheses, 
Non-parametric Estimation 
2.  Knowledge in Random Sampling, Unbiased Estimation, Bias -Variance Tradeoff, 
Goodness of Fit.  
 
Contents  
Random Sampling & Sampling Distributions [5 lectures] : Random sampling, exact 
sampling distributions: Chi-square, t and F distributions, large sample theory. 
Point and Interval Estimations [16 lectures]: Point estimator, properties of an estimator, 
factorization, MVUE, maximum likelihood method of estimation,  Cramer-Rao bound, 
confidence interval estimation. 
Tests of Hypotheses [21 lectures]: Review of hypotheses testing, Neyman-Pearson theory, 
general linear hypothesis, method of least squares, analysis of variance (one way and two 
way), analysis of categorical data, Chi -square test for goodness of fit, test of 
independence, non-parametric tests. 
 
Text Books  
1. Rohatgi, V. K., Statistical Inference, Dover Publications Inc., 2003. 
2. Hogg, R. V., McKean, J. W., Craig, A. T., Introduction to Mathematical Statistics, 
Pearson, 2009. 
 
Reference Books  
1. Casella, G. and Berger, R. L., Statistical Inference, Brooks/Cole Publishing Company, 
2003. 
2. Rao, C. R., Linear Statistical Inference and Its Applications, Wiley, 2006. 
3. Gibbons, J.D. and Chakroborti, S., Nonparametric Statistical Inference, CRC Press, 
2010 
 
Online Course material: 
1. Zhou Fan, Introduction to Statistical Inference, Online Course Material, Stanford 
University, http://web.stanford.edu/class/stats200/ 
2. Kumar, S., Statistical Inference, NPTEL Course Material, Depart ment of 
Mathematics, IIT Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111105124/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
80 
 
Title Stochastic Calculus Number MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D 
[C] 
3–0–0-0 
[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/Ph.D.(MA) Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
1. To develop an understanding of financial market 
2. Given a discrete process, pricing of options, such as European, American, Asian 
and other exotic options 
3. To develop an understanding of change of measure, Martingales and Brownian 
motion 
4. Use of Black-Scholes model under various conditions 
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. Understanding derivatives and securities 
2. Pricing and valuation in discrete case 
3. Binomial model and self-financing strategy 
4. Black Scholes model and interest rate models 
 
Contents  
 
[10 lectures]: General probability spaces, Gaussian and log -normal distribution, 
martingales and stopping times, Brownian motion and its properties, Ito‟s integral and 
martingale properties of Ito‟s integral. 
 
[12 lectur es]:Continuous time financial market models, Black -Scholes-Merton model, 
Black-Scholes PDE and formulas, risk -neutral valuation, option pricing, the Greeks, put -
call parity, Risk -neutral valuation, risk -neutral measure, Girsanov's theorem for change 
of mea sure, martingale representation theorems, representation of Brownian 
martingales 
 
[20 lectures]: Stochastic differential equations, existence and uniqueness of solutions, 
Feynman-Kac formula and its applications, models with stochastic volatility, pricing a nd 
hedging in incomplete markets, bond markets, term -structures of interest rates, bond 
pricing, Short rate models, martingale models for short rate, Vasicek, Cox -Ingersoll-Ross 
and Hull-White models, multifactor models; Forward rate models, Heath -Jarrow-Morton 
model. 
 
Textbooks  
1. Shreve, S. E., Stochastic Calculus for Finance I; The Binomial Asset Pricing Model 
, Springer-Verlag, 2004  
2. Shreve, S. E., Stochastic Calculus for Finance II; Continuous -Time Model, 
Springer, 2004. 
 
Reference Books  
     1. Baxter, M. and Rennie, A., Financial Calculus, University Press, Cambridge 1996  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
81 
 
Title Calculus of variations and Integral 
Equations 
Number MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-D [3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/Ph.D.(MA) Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce variational problems with methods to solve them. 
2. Introduce the integral transforms and integral equations, and their solution 
methods 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Maximize or minimize functionals associated with the variational problems. 
2. Apply integral transforms to solve differential equations. 
3. Solve Fredholm and Volterra integral equations. 
 
Contents  
 
Calculus of Variation [20 Lectures] : Introduction to Variational problems, functionals, 
Functional dependence on first order derivatives, Euler equations, Functional dependence 
on functions of several independent variables, Variational problems with moving 
boundaries, Rayleigh-Ritz and Galerkin‟s Method. 
Integral Transforms [8 Lectures] : Fourier, Fourier sine/cosine and Laplace transforms 
and their properties, convolution theorem and application to solve differential equations.  
Integral Equations [12 Lectures] : Classification of Integral equat ions, Neumann‟s 
iterative method for Fredholm‟s equation of the second kind, Volterra type integral 
equations, Integral equations of the first kind and Convolution type Integral Equations.  
 
Text books  
1. Gupta, A.S., Calculus of Variation, Prentice Hall of India Pvt. Ltd. 1996 
2. Debnath L. and Bhatta, D., Integral transformations and their applications, 2 nd 
Edition,  Chapman and Hall / CRC publications, 2007 
3. Moiseiwitsch, B. L., Integral equations, Logman, 1977 
 
Reference Books  
1. Gelfand, I. M. and Francis, S.V., Calculus of Variation, Prentice Hall, New Jersey, 
1963 
2. Yosida, K., Lectures on differential and integral equations, Dover, 1991 
3. Hildebrand, F. B. , Methods of applied mathematics, 2nd Ed, Prentice-Hall, 1965 
 
Online Course Material  
1. Agrawal, P.N. and Pandey, D.N., Integral equations, calculus of variations and its 
applications, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mathematics, IIT Roorkee,  
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107103/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
82 
 
Title Chaos Theory and its Applications Number MA7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 
[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/PhD (MA) Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
1. To equip the students with the basic fundamentals of chaos theory. 
2. Learning and understanding various routes to chaos.  
3. To introduce applications of chaos to various physical systems and its introduction 
in IFS. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. Notion of chaos in one dimension. 
2. Understanding Bifurcation theory and different routes to chaos. 
3. Two dimensional flows, phase portraits and chaos in higher dimension. 
 
Contents  
Discrete Dynamical Systems[16 Lectures]: One dimensional maps, Fixed points, periodic 
points and Stability, Basin of Attraction, Bifurcation, period doubling and route to chaos, 
Sharkovsky‟s theorem, Li -Yorke Theorem, Lorentz System and chaos, Chaos in one 
dimension, density of periodic points, transitivity, sensitive dependence on initial 
conditions, cantor‟s set, conjugacy, symbolic dynamics, Various notions of chaos, Phase 
space diagrams, Linear Systems and their stability. 
 
Continuous Dynamical Systems [14 Lectures] : One dimensional flows, chaos in one 
dimension, Fixed points and Stability, Flows on the circle, Bifurcation, Saddle node 
Bifurcation, Transcritical Bifurcation, Pitchfork Bifurcation, Hopf Bifurcation, phase 
portraits,  existence and uniqueness, fixed po ints and linearization, conservative 
systems, limit cycles, Poincare-Bendixson Theorem.   
 
Fractals and Dynamical Systems [12 Lectures] : Fractals, cantor set, dimension of self -
similar fractals, Box dimension, correlation dimension, Iterated Function System , Collage 
Theorem and Image Compression, Julia and Mandelbrot Sets. 
 
Textbook  
1. Saber N.  Elaydi, Discrete Chaos: With Applications in Science and Engineering, 
CRC Press, Second Edition. 
2. Steven H.  Strogatz, Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos:  With Applications to 
Physics, Biology, Chemistry and Engineering, Westview Press, First edition. 
 
Reference Books  
1. H Nagashima and Y Baba, Introduction to Chaos:  Physics and Mathematics of 
Chaotic Phenomena, CRC Press; First edition. 
2. G. Stuck and Michael Brin, Introduction  to Dynamical Systems, Cambridge 
University Press; First edition 
 
Online Course Material  
1. Nagar A. (IIT Delhi) Chaotic Dynamical Systems , 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111102110/ 
2. Banerjee S. (IIT Kharagpur), Chaos, Fractals and Dynamic Systems ,  
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108105054/ 
 
 
 
 
83 
 
Title Machine Learning and Pattern 
Recognition 
Number MA7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 
[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA) Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce the mathematical and statistical techniques used in pattern recognition.  
2. Impart knowledge on differentiate among various pattern recognition techniques. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Formulate high dimensional feature vectors from observations. 
2. Select an appropriate pattern analysis tool for analysing data in a given feature 
space. 
3. Apply pattern analysis tools to practical applications and detect patterns in the 
data. 
 
Contents  
Introduction [2 Lectures] : Definitions, data sets for Pattern Recognition, Different 
Paradigms of Pattern Recognition. 
 
Bayes Decision Theory [8 Lectures] : Bayes Decision Theory: Bayes decision rule, 
Minimum error rate classification, Normal density and discriminant functions, Bayesian 
networks. 
 
Generative Methods [8 Lectures] : Maximum Likelihood and Bayesian Parameter 
Estimation, Nonparametric techniques. 
 
Discriminative Methods [8 Lectures] : Distance -based methods, Linear Discriminant 
Functions, Artificial Neural Networks, Support Vector Machines. 
 
Clustering and Principal Component Analysis [8 Lectures]: k-means clustering, Gaussian 
Mixture Modeling, EM-algorithm, PCA, Kernel PCA, Probabilistic PCA. 
 
Combining Classifiers [8 Lectures] : Bagging and Boosting, Adaboost, Bayesian Model 
Averaging. 
 
Textbook  
1. Duda, R. O., Hart, P. E. and Stork, D., Pattern Classification 2/e, Wiley, 2002.  
2. Bishop, C., Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, Springer, 2006. 
 
Reference Books  
1. Theodoridis, S. and Koutroumbas, K. (2008) Pattern Recognition, Edition 4. 
Academic Press.  
2. MacKay, D.J.C. (2004) Information Theory, Inference and Learning Algorithms, 
Cambridge University Press. 
3. Cristianini, N. and Taylor, J. S. (2000) An Introduction to Support Vector 
Machines, Cambridge University Press. 
 
Online Course Material  
1. Das, S. and Murthy, C.A. (IIT Madras) Pattern Recognition , 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106106046/ 
 
84 
 
Title Numerical solutions of Partial Differential 
Equations 
Number MAL8XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P 
[C] 
3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA) Type Elective  
Prerequisite Partial Differential Equations   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will introduce  
1. finite difference schemes for numerical solutions of partial differential equations 
2. carry out numerical analysis of various finite difference schemes  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. apply finite difference schemes for numerical solution of partial differential 
equations 
2. carry out error analysis and stability analysis of finite difference schemes 
 
Contents  
 
Fractal 1: Numerical methods for PDE (MAL8XX1) 
 
[8 Lectures]  Characterization of PDEs, Finite difference methods for elliptic, parabolic 
and hyperbolic problems. 
 
[6 Lectures] Stability, consistency and convergence theory, dissipation and dispersion, 
error estimates. 
 
Fractal 2: Numerical Analysis for PDE (MAL8XX2) 
 
Parabolic equations [6 Lectures]:  Fourier analysis of the error, Alternating direction 
implicit method 
 
Elliptic equations [6 Lectures] : Stability analysis by the energy method, Error analysis 
with a maximum principle, asymptotic error estimates, convergence result 
 
Hyperbolic equations [10 Lectures]:  CFL condition, Von Neumann stability Analysis, 
upwind scheme, Lax -Wendroff scheme, leap -frog scheme, Hamiltonian systems and 
symplectic schemes 
 
Numerical li near algebra [6 Lectures]:  Classical iterative Methods for solving linear 
systems, large sparse linear systems, GMRES algorithm, preconditioned Conjugate 
Gradient method, multigrid method (overview), Newton's method and its variations for 
solving nonlinear systems. 
 
Text books  
1. Quarteroni, A. and Valli, A. , Numerical Approximation of Partial Differential 
Equations, Springer, 1997 
2. Morton, K. W.  and Mayers, D. F. , Numerical solution of partial differential 
equations, CUP, 2005 
 
Reference Books  
1. Thomas, J. W. , Numerical partial differential equations: Finite difference 
methods, Springer, 1995 
2. Trefethen, L. N. and David Bau III, Numerical Linear Algebra, SIAM, 1997 
 
Online Course Material  
85 
 
1. Nayak, A. K., Numerical methods: Finite Difference Approach, NPTEL Course, 
Department of Mathematics, IIT Roorkee, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107107/. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
86 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Courses 
 
Offered by 
 
Humanities and Social Science Department 
 
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
87 
 
PG Compulsory Courses(to be approved) 
1. HSN7XX0 Technical Communication 1-0-0 (1) 
2. HSN7XX0  Ethics and Professional Life 1-0-0 (1) 
 
PG Electives (to be approved) 
1. HSL7XX0  Cine-Politics under National Emergency 3-0-0 (to be approved) 
2. HSL7XX0 Sociology of Science and Technology 3-0-0 (to be approved) 
3. HSL7XX0 Digital Society 3-0-0 (to be approved) 
 
PG Electives (already approved) 
 
 
4. HSL7XX0 Gender and Society 3-0-0 (3) 
5. HSL7XX0 Sociocultural Theories 3-0-0 (3) 
6. HSL7XX0 Foundations of Sustainability 3-0-0 (3) 
7. HSL7XX0 Nature Writings in American Literature 3-0-0 (3) 
8. HSL7XX0 Literature and Environment 3-0-0(3) 
9. HSL7XX0 Twentieth Century Analytic Philosophy 3-0-0 (3) 
10. HSL7XX0 Language and Cognition 3-0-0 (3) 
11. HSL7XX0 Ethical Theories and Moral Practices 3-0-0 (3) 
12. HSL7XX0 Philosophy of Mind 3-0-0 (3) 
13. HSL7XX0 Bioengineering Ethics 3-0-0 (3) 
14. HSL7XX0 Cognitive Science 3-0-0 (3) 
15. HSL7XX0 Qualitative and Quantitative Methodology 3-0-0(3) 
16. HSL7XX0 Consciousness  3-0-0 (3) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
88 
 
Title Technical Communication Number HSNXX 
Department Humanities and Social Sciences L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 
Offered for M.Tech and PhD Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite None   
Objectives  
The Instructor will:  
1. Enable a student to face the challenges in communication, primarily in a technical milieu. 
2.Enhance a student‟s English Language skills namely listening, speaking, reading and writing 
(LSRW) and the role played by them in the process of communication. 
3. Make students conversant in addressing communication challenges that impact organizations 
through sharing of best practices and group learning. 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Comprehend, recognize and articulate the formal elements of specific genres of technical 
communication. 
2.To gain a familiarity with practical and theoretical aspects of various trends and debates in 
technical communication 
3. To develop a sensibility and appreciation for some of the ideas, issues, and problems involved 
in writing about technology and in workplace writing. 
Contents Part I (HSS Faculty) Total –  07 hours (07 Lectures)  
Introduction to Communication – Introduction to Communication and the Importance of 
Communicating in English, Role of Emotions in Communication, Basics of Communication, 
Purpose and Audience, Cross-Cultural Communication, Language as a tool of communication, 
LSRW. (1 hour) 
Listening -Introduction to Listening, Types of Listening, Active Listening, Barriers to Listening, 
Listening to pre-recorded audio visual material/film. (1 hour) 
Speaking –Introduction to Speaking, Mock Personal Interviews, Body Language, Organizing and 
learning to make a presentation, Phonetics and Basic Pronunciation, Common Errors in English, 
Telephone Etiquette, Group Discussions.(2 hour) 
Reading - Purpose of Reading, Topic Sentence and its role, Reading for different purposes, 
Reading Comprehension, Reading Techniques. (1 hour) 
Writing– Introduction, Importance, Characteristics, Impersonal and Formal language, Elements 
of Style, Techniques for Good Technical Writing, Paragraph Writing, Writing a Formal Letter, 
Writing an Email, Plagiarism. (2 hours) 
 
Part II (Faculty of Engineering and Sciences) – 07 hours (07 Lectures) 
89 
 
Introduction to  Technical Communication 
Writing – Mechanics of Technical Writing, Organization and Structure in Technical Writing, 
Writing an abstract, Writing a Research Paper, Writing a Review, Report Writing, Writing 
Technical descriptions, Copyediting and formatting, Referencing, Citations, Plagiarism.(4 hours) 
Reading – Identifying Language Errors, Reading Comprehension with specific reference to 
passages/articles in Science and Technology. (1 hour) 
Lectures with Hands on Training – Grammarly, End note, Language software, Document 
processing using software.(2 hours) 
 
Reference Books 
1.Raman, Meenakshi and Sangeeta Sharma. Technical Communication: Principles and Practice. 
Oxford University Press: New Delhi, 2011. 
2. A Text Book of English for Engineers and Technologists. Division of Humanities and Social 
Sciences, Anna University, Orient Black Swan: Chennai, 2002. 
 
Online Course Material 
1.Technical English for Engineers-https://nptel.ac.in/courses/109106094/ 
 
  
90 
 
Title Ethics and Professional Life Number HSN7XX0 
Department Humanities and Social Sciences L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 
Offered for M.Tech and PhD Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite None   
Objectives  
1. To help students identifying ethical responsibilities linked to their professions 
2. To assist students in analyzing professional decisions from ethical perspectives 
      3.   To help students cultivating professional integrity and moral ideals 
Learning Outcomes  
1. Students will be familiar with the manifold responsibilities attached to their professions 
2. Students shall be able toappreciate the role of normative principles in taking 
professional decisions  
3. Students shall be able to respond to ethical issues with integrity and creativeimagination 
Contents:  
1. Conceptual Foundations:  Why Should One be Moral ?; Relevance of Professional Ethics; Tools 
and Techniques; Professional Codes; Normativity of Science and Technology   
        (2 hours) 
2. Professions and Moral Dilemmas:  Contemporary Ethical Issues (to be analyzed with the help of 
case studies and focusing on the nature of the group): 
Personal: Normative Numbness; Conflicts of Interests; Theft; Deception; Corruption; Partiality  
Interpersonal: Contracts; Violation of Rights; Consent and Dissent; Special Obligations; privacy and 
confidentiality 
Organizational: Fairness within the Organization; Hiring; Conduct at Workplace  
Social: Norms for a Game Changer; IPR; Reliability of Research Findings; Risk Assessment; Animal 
and Human Experimentation      (09 hours) 
3. Professional Responsibility : Individual and Collective Responsibility; Corporate Social 
Responsibility; Rectificatory Issues; Sustainability     (3 hours) 
 
Text Books: 
1. Ethical Issues in Professional Life, Callahan, J., Oxford University Press, 1998.  
2. Philosophy of Technology and Engineering Sciences, Meijers, A., Elsevier, 2009 
 
 
91 
 
Title Cine-Politics under the National Emergency Number HSL7XX0 
Department Humanities and Social Sciences L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 
Offered for B. Tech., M. Tech. and Ph.D. Programs  Type Elective 
Prerequisite None    
Objectives  
1.To help students explore the intricacies of cultural forms and practices in the  
larger context of the political lives of the Indian nation 
2.To help students become familiar with some of the most significant events in the 
history of post-independence India through the prism of film history and state policy 
3.To make students familiar with conceptual apparatuses in cinema studies and with 
the overlaps between political and cultural histories 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.Read archival and other materials that are relevant for history-writing 
2.Explore associations between public institutions, national history, mass and avant -
garde culture and the ever-changing socio-politico-cultural dynamics 
3.Develop acquaintance with contemporary scholarly writings on Indian history, 
cinema and politics  
 
Contents  
Introducing Emergency and its Politics –The National Emergency, historical trajectory, 
relevance in Indian politics, literature review (6 lectures)  
Cinema, Cine -Politics and Cultural Politics – Defining Cine -Politics, Nation -Industry 
negotiations, carrying out cine -archival research, reading of film industry and film 
society materials/publications, review of relevant theoretical schools in Indian 
cinema studies (12 lectures)     
Sponsorship and Censorship: the Indian New Wave and Other Cinemas - Censorship, 
Prime Minister‟s 20-point program, role of I&B ministry, industrial responses, Indian 
New Wave and state -sponsored cinema in the 1970s, debates on sp onsorship and 
film economy (12 lectures)  
Globalization of the Dictatorial in the 1970s: Digital Remembering – The idea of the 
dictatorial, ideological associations between global dictatorial regimes, cine -cultural 
evidence and responses, archiving of evide nce in the days of the digital, conclusion 
(12 lectures)  
 
92 
 
Textbooks 
1. Rajadhyaksha, Ashish. Indian Cinema in the Time of Celluloid: From Bollywood to 
the Emergency. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2009.  
Reference Book 
1. Joshi, Priya, and Rajinder Dudrah, eds. The 1970s and Its Legacies in India’s 
Cinemas. New York: Routledge, 2014.  
Online Course Material 
1. https://indiancine.ma/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
93 
 
Title Sociology of Science and Technology Number HSL7XX0 
Department Humanities and Social Sciences L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 
Offered for B. Tech, M.Tech and Ph. D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
1. To help students conceptualize science and technology as embedded in culture, 
politics and sociality and understand how technical knowledge is produced in 
society.  
2. To help students explore the dynamic relationship between technology and 
society and discover how technology and society influence each other. 
3. To make students conversant with important and new concepts in science and 
technology studies in social anthropology.  
Learning Outcomes  
1.Comprehend technological progress as a social process  
2.Find connections between science, technology and culture and think beyond 
simple binaries like „natural‟ and „social‟ sciences and „nature‟ and „culture‟. 
3.Develop sensitivity towards an inclusive, sustainable use of technology and 
appreciate the significance of diversity in science studies  
Contents  
Introduction to the  Sociology of Science  – Introduction to the subject, its founding 
concepts and traditions, methods of doing STS studies, History of Science and its 
philosophical traditions – logical positivism,  falsification and its critique (5 lectures) 
Methodology of S cience and its s ocial connections - Structure of scientific revolutions, 
Ethics and ethos in science and deviance in practice of science, the Matthew Effect, 
and practicing „agnostic‟ science, scientific inventions as cultural capital, social life of 
scientists. (8 lectures)   
Social Construction of Science - Methods of representation in science, Ethnography of a 
laboratory, social construction of „realities‟, social construction of nature, Effect of 
social understanding of race and gender on production of scientific knowledge (9 
lectures) 
STS as Social Science  – Actor Network theory, Pasteurization and the world of non -
humans, influence of science studies on social sciences, ecological understanding of 
the world, towards an inclusive understanding of the universe through STS.(8  
lectures) 
Technology and New Media – Technology as applied science, Gaming as culture, 
Hacking as counter -culture, Social media, Algorithms as social documents (8 
lectures) 
Science and Technology in India - Science & Technology in Colonial India, Development 
94 
 
of Indian Science, Science and Governance in India (4 lectures) 
Textbooks 
1.Sismondo, S. (2010), An Introduction to Science and Technology Studies , 2nd 
Edition, Wiley Blackwell 
2.Miller, D. et. al. edited (2012), Digital Anthropology, Berg. 
Reference Book 
Felt U., Fouche, R. et. al. edited (2017), The Handbook of Science and Technology 
Studies, MIT Press 
Online Course Material 
1. Mallick, S.Science, Technology and Society , NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
HSS, IIT Guwahati, https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc17_hs26/preview 
2. Mishra, A.Sociology of Science , NPTEL Course Material, Department of HSS, Indian 
Institute of Technology Roorkee, https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc18_hs09/preview 
 
 
  
95 
 
Title Digital Society  Number HSL7XX0 
Department Humanities and Social Sciences L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech., M.Sc., M.Tech, Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
Introduce students to the dominant discourses that frame debates on digital society  
Familiarize students with the literature pertaining to web technologies and their 
cultural, legal and ethical formations and practices 
Familiarize students with the complex relationships between digital cultures and 
digital divides 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Identify the ways in which digital media shape identity 
Utilize new opportunities for meaningful data collection from and using sophisticated 
forms of artificial intelligence 
Identify knowledge and truth amongst the abundance of information 
Contents  
Introduction to Digital Society : Digital components of a conn ected society (2 
Lectures) 
Theorizing Digital Society: New forms of power; Data as sociomaterial objects ; 
Archives; Digital veillance (6 Lectures) 
Digital Identities and Relationships : Self and the Digital Society; Embodied 
Identities in Digital Society; Bias and Privilege  – Digital Inequalities ; Marginalised 
Histories; Cyborgs(6 Lectures) 
Digital Spaces and Practices : Rethinking space and surveillance in digital societies; 
Gender, Space, and Place in Digital Societies ; Urban Informatics and Sociological 
Imagination - Smart cities ; Digital Healthcare; Mobility in Digital Society; Digital 
Heritage (10 Lectures) 
Network Society: The Internet as a Network ; Networks and the Cultural Imaginary; 
Inequalities in the Network Society; Information Capital; Interface Design for Diverse 
Populations (10 Lectures) 
Re-conceptualizing Research in a Digital Age: Information Management  – Data 
Analysis Software ; Large Digital Systems ; Data protection and the politics of data 
privacy (8 Lectures) 
Textbook  
1. Lupton,D., (2015), Digital Sociology, London, New York:Routledge 
96 
 
2. Gere,C., (2008), Digital Culture, 2nd Edition, London: Reaktion Books Limited 
Reference Books  
1.  Bentkowska-Kafel, A., Cashen, T., and Gardiner, H. (Eds.) (2009), Digital Visual 
Culture: Theory and Practice, Bristol and Chicago: Intellect Books 
2. Karaganis, J . (Ed.), ( 2007), Structures of Participation in Digital Culture , Social 
Science Research Council, Columbia University Press 
3.  Tredinnick, L. (2008), Digital Information Culture: The Individual  and Society in the 
Digital Age, Oxford: Chandos Publishing Limited 
Online Resources 
1. Digital Humanities Seminar Video Archive of the Open University, UK, 
http://www.open.ac.uk/arts/research/digital-humanities/videos 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
97 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Non Graded Institute Level Courses 
For 
 
M.Tech. and Ph.D. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
98 
 
Title Systems Engineering and Project Management 
 
Number OAL7XX0 
Department  L-T-P [C] 1-0-0  [1] 
Offered for M.Tech Program 
 
Type Compulsory
NGU 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
Systems Engineering is an interdisciplinary approach and means to enable  realization of 
successful systems. It focuses on defining requirements and then proceeding with design 
synthesis and system validation while considering the complete problem includin g operations, 
performance, test, manufacturing, cost, and schedule.  
This course intends to help students to develop the capability of systems thinking by 
introducing basics of systems  engineering theory, methods, and tools through lecture and 
practice.  
Learning Outcomes 
After taking this class, you should be able to: 
 Develop a systems engineering plan for a realistic project. 
 Judge the applicability of any proposed process, strategy, or methodology for systems 
engineering  
 Apply systems engineering tools (e.g., requirements development and management, 
robust design, Design Structure Matrix) to realistic problems. 
 Know how to proactively design for and manage system lifecycle targets. 
 Understanding TRL and MRL concepts 
 Use project management tools 
 
Contents 
 Introduction - Terminology, Systems Thinking, Today‟s Challenges (1 L) 
 Requirements Elicitation,  Documenting System Requirements - Proper Specification 
Language, Depth of Definition (1 L) 
 Requirements Analysis - Context Diagrams, Functional Analysis, State Diagrams (2 L) 
 Requirements Validation - User Feedback Techniques, Requirements Reviews (1 L) 
 System Architecture - Subsystem Definition, Hierarchical Analysis, Design for Reuse, 
Interface Management (2 L) 
 Specialty Engineering - Producibility/Manufacturability, Reliability/Availability, 
Maintainability/Serviceability, Usability/User Interface, Design-to-Cost (2 L) 
 Managing Systems Engineering - Estimating, Planning, Tracking, System Engineering 
99 
 
Management Plan, Work Breakdown Structure, Technical Reviews (2 L) 
 Introduction to the concepts of TRL (Technology Readiness Levels) and 
MRL(Manufacturability Readiness level)  (1 L) 
 Course Project  ( 8 hrs of self-work corresponding to 2 scheduled contact hours) 
o Application of Systems Engineering Methodology to the Major Project (M.Tech)  
o Use of Microsoft Project as the software tool for managing their M.Tech project 
 
Evaluation 
Presentation of Systems Engineering Process of the Major Project 
 
Textbook 
 
1. Introduction to Systems Engineering by Ian Faulconbridge, Michael Ryan (Kindle 
Edition) 
Argos Press, 2015.  
2. Systems Engineering Fundamentals  
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/aeronautics...systems-engineering.../sefguide_01_01.pdf 
3. https://www.sebokwiki.org/wiki/Introduction_to_Systems_Engineering 
 
Web Resources 
1. https://www.coursera.org/learn/systems-engineering 
2. https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/aeronautics-and-astronautics/16-842-
fundamentals-of-systems-engineering-fall-2015/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
100 
 
Title Innovation and IP Management 
Management of Innovation and IP 
Number OAL7XX0 
Department OA L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 
Offered for All M. Tech and PhD students <Shall also be 
considered for B.Tech Students> 
Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Not required   
Objectives 
This course is intended to familiarise students with basic concepts of IP, its 
relevance to innovations and their effective exploitation including emerging societal 
issues. 
The Instructor will: 
1. Highlight concept of Innovations and processes that leads to innovations. 
2. Illustrate the significance of IPR in the context of Innovations and Demonstrate 
how information in IP data bases are used to enhance quality of innovations. 
3. Explain how IP can be meaningfully Exploited in commerce and for benefit of 
society. 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Use IP information as an effective resource for innovation. 
2.  Protecting innovations as IP.  
3.  Design IP strategies for protection of innovations and commercial exploitations.  
Contents  
Module I: Types of creations and innovations using the mind, Modes of IP protection of 
the output of the Human mind, Such as Patents, Design registrations, Trade Mark, 
Copyright, Trade Secrets, Geographical Indications. (5L) 
Module-2 : Searching IP databases to extract technical information for research. 
Concept of Patentable inventions. Evaluating Inventions for patentability and drafting of 
patent specifications. Procedures for patent applications and their examination. 
Introducing processes for Design registrations, Trade Mark, Copyright, Trade Secrets, 
Geographical Indications. (6L) 
Module-3 : Use of IP in Trade and Commerce. Societal issues. (3L) 
Textbook 
 
 
101 
 
 
 
Ph.D. Programme 
 
In 
 
Digital Humanities 
 
 
Offered by 
 
Digital Humanities 
 Inter Disciplinary Research Platform 
 
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur 
 
 
 
 
 
102 
 
Introduction 
 
The digital revolution of the 20th and 21st centuries has created new knowledge and 
spaces for humankind to evolve culturally with the construction of techniques and 
technologies. As a corollary, a new field of organised research emerged at the beginning 
of the 2000s examining the use and application of digital technologies in the humanities, 
liberal arts, social science scholarship, computer sciences, and beyond. Popularly nested 
under an umbrella term “Digital Humanities”, this area of scholarship takes a  critical 
stance to examine the role, use, application, and impact of digital tools in our everyday 
life, our societies, economies, cultures, and governments. However, while the use of 
computational tools in social science and humanities work is not very n ew, the 
availability of a large body of cultural artefacts after the digital turn, as well as 
emergence of new kinds of digital objects and embodiments, has opened up several 
possibilities for social science and humanities research, practice and pedagogy u sing 
computational approaches. Very soon, the question of whether something is, or is not, 
„digital‟ will be increasingly secondary as many forms of culture become mediated, 
produced, accessed, distributed or consumed through digital devices and technologi es. 
In other words, the field of Digital Humanities is expected to grow on 
interdisciplinaryrather than multidisciplinary principles. The research focus and pedagogy 
in this program emphasize many of the emerging epistemological questions on 
knowledge prod uction about generating digital data from material objects, and on 
rethinking existing processes of knowledge production. 
 
Objective of the Program 
 
IIT Jodhpur is one of the pioneering institutes in the country currently offering an 
interdisciplinary doct oral degree in Digital Hum anities. This doctoral program  offers 
unique opportunities to redraw conventional disciplinary boundaries among the 
humanities, the social sciences, the arts, technology and engineering, and the natural 
sciences. Primary objectives of the program include (but are not limited to):  
 
1. Introducing and exploring a broad spectrum of perspectives on the Digital 
Humanities 
2. Developing familiarity with a range of Digital Humanities projects, as well as the 
ability to evaluate the tools and m ethods involved in creating and analysing those 
projects 
3. Critical and reflexive use of digital tools, technologies, and spaces by 
understanding that all technologies are complex and socially situated, through 
which humans make meaning 
 
Doctoral students opting for this program are expected to contribute towards integrating 
disciplinary approaches of the humanities, liberal arts, social sciences, and computer 
technologies, with cross -disciplinary theorising and research that can be avant -garde to 
103 
 
the field of Digital Humanities. Doctoral research in Digital Humanities shall be premised 
on project-oriented knowledge production, the practical application of methods, and shall 
involve interdisciplinary collaboration workflows. To enhance such collaborative 
workflows, the  programme will actively involve academics and resource people from 
other institutes and universities across the country and internationally.  
Expected Graduate Attributes 
In depth understanding of the fundamental concepts of broad areas in Humanities, Social 
Sciences, and application areas of basic computational tools.   
1. Ability to undertake problems in multidisciplinary domains of Humanities, Social 
Sciences, Computer Sciences, Mathematics, and related disciplines. 
2. Skills to demonstrate basic principles of Humanities and Social Sciences through 
various application areas and analytical processes.  
3. Ability to make effective oral and written technical communication. 
4. Appreciation and adherence to norms of professional ethics. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Appreciate and critically discuss Digital Humanities projects in light of current 
methods and theoretical approaches to the field 
2. Explain how Digital Humanities methods and practices are applied in different 
disciplines 
3. Skillset to plan, develop, and evaluate a Digital Humanities research project 
4. Fundamental understanding of research tools to plan for and evaluate the 
effectiveness of Digital Humanities methods including a multitude of platforms 
such as social media and web tools. 
5. Understand what data mean in different contexts 
6. Capture, collect, and analyse a variety of data types related to Digital Humanities 
research project  
 
Program Structure and Credit Structure: 
Semester 1 Semester 2 
Electives* Electives* 
Semester 3 Semester 4 
DH799Ph.D. Thesis DH799 Ph.D. Thesis 
Semester 5 Semester 6 
DH799 Ph.D. Thesis DH799 Ph.D. Thesis 
Semester 7 Semester 8 
DH799 Ph.D. Thesis DH799 Ph.D. Thesis 
*The number of electives and credit structure are as per the Ph.D. norms of the 
Institute. Electives are to be chosen in consultation with the Coordinator, Digital 
Humanities. A maximum of one Self Study course may be included in the course 
curriculum.  
 
  
104 
 
List of recommended electives:  
 
Digital Humanities (IDRP) 
DHL7xx0 Fundamentals of Digital Humanities (3 credits) 
DHL7xx0 Digital Methods and Tools (3 credits) 
DHL7xx0 Selected Topics in Digital Humanities I (1 credit)  
DHL7xx0 Selected Topics in Digital Humanities II (2 credits)  
DHL7xx0 Selected Topics in Digital Humanities III (3 credits)  
DHD7xx0 DH Project (3 credits; L-T-P: 0-0-6) 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering 
CSL7xx0 Selected Topics in AI - I (1 credit) 
CSL7xx0 Selected Topics in AI – II (2 credits) 
CSL7xx0 Selected Topics in AI – III (3 credits) 
CSL7xx0 Natural Language Processing (3 credits) 
CSL7xx0 Introduction to Augmented Reality and Virtual Reality (3 credits)  
CSL7xx0 Data Visualization (3 credits)  
CSL7xx0 Machine Learning I (3 credits) 
CSL7xx0 Security and its applications (3 credits) 
CSL7xx0 Computational Linguistics (3 credits) 
CSL7xx0 Algorithms for Big Data (3 credits)  
CSL7xx0 Machine Learning with Big Data (3 credits)  
Department of Electrical Engineering 
EEL7xx0 Data Compression (3 credits)  
Department of Humanities and Social Sciences 
HSL7xx0 Sociology of Science and Technology (3 credits) 
HSL7xx0 Digital Society (3 credits) 
HSL7xx0 Cine-Politics under the National Emergency (3 credits)  
Department of Mathematics 
MAL7xx1 Statistics I (1 credit) 
MAL7xx0 Statistics II (2 credits) 
 
 
105 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DH Electives 
  
106 
 
Title Fundamentals of Digital Humanities Number DHL7010 
Department IDRP-DH L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. (Cr>=100); M.Sc. (Cr >=30); 
M.Tech. (Cr.>0); Ph.D. (Cr.>0) 
Type Elective  
Prerequisite  None   
 
Objectives 
1. Introduce and explore a broad spectrum of perspectives on the Digital 
Humanities 
2. Develop familiarity with a range of Digital Humanities projects, as well as 
the ability to evaluate the tools and methods involved in creating and 
analysing those projects 
3. Critical and reflexive use of digital tools, technologies, and spaces by 
understanding that all technologies are complex and socially situated, 
through which humans make meaning 
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. Appreciate and critically discuss Digital Humanities projects in light of 
current methods and theoretical approaches to the field 
2. Explain how Digital Humanities methods and practices are applied in 
different disciplines 
3. Skillset to plan, develop, and evaluate a Digital Humanities research 
project 
 
Fractal Course Contents  
 
Fractal 1: Digital Humanities: Emerging Contours (DHL7011) 
 
Introduction: What is Digital Humanities, Evolution of classical disciplines into 
Digital Humanities 
Digital Cultural Heritage; Conceptualising DH projects; Interdisciplinary style of 
proposal writing [4 Lectures]  
Computational Humanities[3 Lectures]  
Digital Embodiment: Embodied Identities in Digital Society; Bias and Privilege – 
107 
 
Marginalised Histories; Cyborgs, Gender, Space, and Place in Digital Societies [4 
Lectures]  
Literature and Technology, Text Analysis, Data Visualisation [3 Lectures]  
 
Hands-on Exercises 
1. Identifying DH projects from traditional projects: Concrete examples and a 
range of approaches to DH from the traditional disciplines.  
2. Digital Humanities Project Critiques: Exploring the project goals, what type 
of data it used, how that data was found and/or transformed, what 
technologies were used, and why.  
 
References Books 
1. Gere, C., (2008), Digital Culture, 2nd Edition, London: Reakt ion Books 
Limited 
2. Bentkowska-Kafel, A., Cashen, T., and Gardiner, H. (Eds.) (2009), Digital 
Visual Culture: Theory and Practice, Bristol and Chicago: Intellect Books 
3. Karaganis, J. (Ed.), (2007), Structures of Participation in Digital Culture, 
Social Science Research Council, Columbia University Press 
 
Online-course material 
Digital Humanities Seminar Video Archive of the Open University, UK, 
http://www.open.ac.uk/arts/research/digital-humanities/videos 
 
Fractal 2: Data and Knowledge representations (DHL7012) 
 
Introduction: Data Sources, Transcribing (Multimedia data), Conversation, 
Discourse Analysis [7 lectures] 
Knowledge Engineering: Ontological engineering, Representation of Ontologies, 
Common Logic, RDFS, Web Ontology Language (OWL), Topic Maps, Multimedia 
Web Ontology Language, Applications [ 7 Lectures] 
 
Hands-on Exercises 
1. Ethnographic data collection and analysis: A case study 
2. Ontology formation from Multimedia Data: A case study 
 
108 
 
References Books 
1. Christopher Joseph Jenks (2011), Transcribing Talk and Interaction: Issues 
in the Representation of Communication Data, John Benjamins Publishing 
Company. 
2. Russel, S. & Norvig, P., (2009), Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, 
Pearson Education 
3. S. Chaudhury, A. Mallik, and H. Ghogh (2016), Multimedia Onto logy 
Representation and Applications, CRC Press. 
Online-Course Materials 
1. Knowledge Representation and Reasoning  
http://videolectures.net/ssll09_pagnucco_krr/ 
http://videolectures.net/eswc2018_rudolph_knowledge_representation/ 
 
Fractal 3: Digital Archives (DHL7013) 
 
Digital memory, Methods of archiving, Theorizing the archive, database [6 lectures] 
Exhibition, installation, audio-visual essays [4 lectures]  
Aesthetics of recreation/ Digital aesthetics, Digital Art [4 lectures]  
 
References Books 
1. Ernst, W., (2013), Digital Memory and the Archive, Minneapolis: University 
of Minnesota Press  
2. Grau, O., Coones, W., and Ruhse, V. (Eds.) (2017), Museum and Archive on 
the Move: Changing Cultural Institutions in the Digital Era, Berlin and 
Boston: De Gruyter  
 
Online-course material 
1. https://indiancine.ma/  
 
  
109 
 
Title Digital Methods and Tools Number DHL7XX0 
Department IDRP-DH L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. (Cr>=100); M.Sc. (Cr >=30); 
M.Tech. (Cr.>0); Ph.D. (Cr.>0) 
Type Elective  
Prerequisite  None   
 
Objectives 
1. Introduce and explore avenues of new and emerging societal and cultural 
entities and methodologies in Digital Humanities.  
2. Provide a conceptual foundation that will allow students to engage critically 
with Digital Humanities research and methods. 
3. Provide basic training digital and computational tools and techniques that can 
enhance students‟ own research. 
Learning Outcomes  
1. Fundamental understanding of research tools that will help students plan for 
and evaluate the effectiveness of Digital Humanities methods including a 
multitude of platforms such as social media and web tools. 
2. Understand what data mean in different contexts 
3. Capture, collect, and analyse a variety of data types related to Digital 
Humanities research project  
 
Fractal Course Contents  
 
Fractal 1: Introduction to Data Science (DHL7XX1) 
 
Components of Fractal 1 from  Introduction to Data Science (M.Tech DCS 
Program) 
Data preparation, Data pre -processing, Data Cleaning, Data Integration, Data 
Transformation, Data Reduction, Redundancy Remova l, Data storage, Data 
Handling, Data Query, Data Representation and Exploration  
Text Books 
110 
 
1. Kotu, V. and Deshpande, B. (2018) Data Science: Concepts and Practice, 
Morgan Kaufmann.  
2. Saltz, J.S. and Stanton, J.M. (2017) An Introduction to Data Science, SAGE 
Publications.  
3. Kelleher, J. D., and Tierney, (2018) Data Science, MIT Press Reference Books  
 
Reference Books 
1. Moreira, J., Carvalho, A. and Horvath, T. (2018) A General Introduction  to 
Data Analytics, John Wiley & Sons.  
2. Mayer-Schonberger, V. and Cukier, K., (2013) Big data: The essential guide 
to work, life and learning in the age of insight, John Murray Publications.  
Fractal 2: Qualitative and Quantitative Analyses (DHL7XX2) 
 
Introduction: Research Question, Research Design, an introduction to research 
methods in digital humanities and mapping the departure from traditiona l research 
methods [2 lectures] 
Overview of Research Methods: Quantitative data collection and analysis, Survey  
design and analysis; Interviews, focus groups and participant observation; 
Discourse and Content Analysis [3 lectures]  
Research Methods in Digital Humanities: Case Studies and projects in Digital 
Humanities; Research method as discipline - how digital hu manities has been 
expanding through deployment of digital methods to study society, culture, 
philosophy and language [4 lectures] 
Techniques of data collection and analysis: Document Image Processing, OCR 
Techniques and its challenges, NLP Introduction, and its applications, Qualitative 
Analysis - Themes, Patterns, Coding using NVivo and MaxQDA [5 lectures] 
References Books 
1. Bryman, Alan (2014), Social Science Research Methods, Oxford University 
Press: Oxford. 
2. Levenberg, Nielsen, Tai, et. al. (2018), Resea rch Methods for Digital 
Humanities, Palgrave Macmillan: New York.  
Fractal 3: Visualization Analysis and Design (DHL7XX3) 
Introduction: Design Effectiveness, Abstraction (Data and Task), Marks and 
Channels, Analysis and Validation [7 lectures] 
Interaction Design: Arranging data, Spatial data, Network and Trees, Map Color and 
Other Channels, Views, Applications, User Experience [ 7 Lectures] 
 
Hands-on Exercises 
111 
 
1. Visualizing Quantitative and Qualitative Data. 
2. Use case-based user experience design. 
 
References Books 
1. William Lidwell, Kritina Holden, Jill Butler (2010), Universal Principles of 
Design, Rockport Publishers. 
2. Tamara Munzner (2014), Visualization Analysis & Design, CRC Press. 
 
Online-course material 
1. Data Science and Visualization, Provided by Harvard University (HarvardX), 
https://www.edx.org/course/data-science-visualization-2 
2. NPTEL Course, Data Visualization in R, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106106179/11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
112 
 
Title Selected Topics in Digital Humanities - I Number DHL7XX0 
Department IDRP-DH L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 
Offered for M.Tech. (Cr>=14)  
Ph.D. (Cr>0) 
Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Expose the students to the latest upcoming fields in the area of Digital Humanities 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply the knowledge of recent topics to specific research areas in the field of Digital 
Humanities 
 
Contents  
The topic clouds for the course include contemporary topics in Digital Humanities and 
may be updated according to the instructor. 
 
Textbook  
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
 
 
113 
 
Title Selected Topics in Digital Humanities - II Number DHL7XX0 
Department IDRP-DH L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 
Offered for M.Tech. (Cr>=14)  
Ph.D. (Cr>0) 
Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Expose the students to the latest upcoming fields in the area of Digital Humanities  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply the knowledge of recent topics to specific research areas in the field of Digital 
Humanities 
 
Contents  
The topic clouds for the course include contemporary topics in Digital Humanities and 
may be updated according to the instructor. 
 
Textbook  
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
 
 
 
114 
 
Title Selected Topics in Digital Humanities - III Number DHL7XX0 
Department IDRP-DH L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. (Cr>=14)  
Ph.D. (Cr>0) 
Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Expose the students to the latest upcoming fields in the area of Digital Humanities 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply the knowledge of recent topics to specific research areas in the field of Digital 
Humanities 
Contents  
The topic clouds for the course include contemporary topics in Digital Humanities and may be 
updated according to the instructor. 
Textbook  
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
Self-Learning Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
Preparatory Course Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
115 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DH Electives 
  
116 
 
Title Fundamentals of Digital Humanities Number DHL7XX0 
Department IDRP-DH L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Prerequisite  None   
Objectives 
4. Introduce and explore a broad spectrum of perspectives on the Digital 
Humanities 
5. Develop familiarity with a range of Digital Humanities projects, as well as the 
ability to evaluate the tools and methods involved in creating and analysing 
those projects 
6. Critical and reflexive use of digital tools, technologies, and spaces by 
understanding that all technologies are complex and socially situated, through 
which humans make meaning 
 
Learning Outcomes  
7. Appreciate and critically discuss Digital Humanities projects in light of current 
methods and theoretical approaches to the field 
8. Explain how Digital Humanities methods and practices are applied in different 
disciplines 
9. Skillset to plan, develop, and evaluate a Digital Humanities research project 
 
Fractal Course Contents  
 
Fractal 1: Digital Humanities: Emerging Contours (DHL7XX1) [1-0-0] 
 
Introduction: What is Digital Humanities, Evolution of classical disciplines into Digital 
Humanities 
Digital Cultural Heritage; Conceptualising DH projects; Interdisciplinary style of 
proposal writing [4 Lectures]  
Computational Humanities[3 Lectures]  
Digital Embodiment: Embodied Identities in Digital Society; Bias and Privilege – 
Marginalised Histories; Cyborgs, Gender, Space, and Place in Digital Societies [4 
Lectures]  
117 
 
Literature and Technology, Text Analysis, Data Visualisation [3 Lectures]  
 
Hands-on Exercises 
3. Identifying DH projects from traditional projects: Concrete examples and a 
range of approaches to DH from the traditional disciplines.  
4. Digital Humanities Project Critiques: Exploring the project goals, what type of 
data it used, how that data was found and/or transformed, what technologies 
were used, and why.  
5.  
References Books 
4. Gere, C., (2008), Digital Culture, 2nd Edition, London: Reaktion Books Limited 
5. Bentkowska-Kafel, A., Cashen, T., and Gardiner, H. (Eds.) (2009), Digital Visual 
Culture: Theory and Practice, Bristol and Chicago: Intellect Books 
6. Karaganis, J. (Ed.), (2007), Structures of Participation in Digital Culture, Social 
Science Research Council, Columbia University Press 
 
Online-course material 
Digital Humanities Seminar Video Archive of the Open University, UK, 
http://www.open.ac.uk/arts/research/digital-humanities/videos 
 
Fractal 2: Data and Knowledge representations (DHL7XX2) [1-0-0] 
 
Introduction: Data Sources, Transcribing (Multimedia data), Conversation, Discourse 
Analysis [7 lectures] 
Knowledge Engineering: Ontological engineering, Representation of Ontologies, 
Common Logic, RDFS, Web Ontology Language (OWL), Topic Maps, Multimedia Web 
Ontology Language, Applications [ 7 Lectures] 
 
Hands-on Exercises 
3. Ethnographic data collection and analysis: A case study 
4. Ontology formation from Multimedia Data: A case study 
 
References Books 
4. Christopher Joseph Jenks (2011), Transcribing Talk and Interaction: Issues in 
the Representation of Communication Data, John Benjamins Publishing 
Company. 
5. Russel, S. & Norvig, P., (2009), Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, 
118 
 
Pearson Education 
6. S. Chaudhury, A. Mallik, and H. Ghogh (2016), Multim edia Ontology 
Representation and Applications, CRC Press. 
Online-Course Materials 
2. Knowledge Representation and Reasoning  
http://videolectures.net/ssll09_pagnucco_krr/ 
http://videolectures.net/eswc2018_rudolph_knowledge_representation/ 
 
Fractal 3: Digital Archives (DHL7XX3) [1-0-0] 
 
Digital memory, Methods of archiving, Theorizing the archive, database [6 lectures] 
Exhibition, installation, audio-visual essays [4 lectures]  
Aesthetics of recreation/ Digital aesthetics, Digital Art [4 lectures]  
 
References Books 
3. Ernst, W., (2013), Digital Memory and the Archive, Minneapolis: University of  
Minnesota Press  
4. Grau, O., Coones, W., and Ruhse, V. (Eds.) (2017), Museum and Archive on the 
Move: Changing Cultural Institutions in the Digital Era, Berlin and Boston: De 
Gruyter  
 
Online-course material 
2. https://indiancine.ma/  
 
  
119 
 
Title Digital Methods and Tools Number DHL7XX0 
Department IDRP-DH L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Prerequisite  None   
 
Objectives 
4. Introduce and explore avenues of new and emerging societal and cultural 
entities and methodologies in Digital Humanities.  
5. Provide a conceptual foundation that will allow students to engage critically 
with Digital Humanities research and methods. 
6. Provide basic training digital and computational tools and techniques that can 
enhance students‟ own research. 
Learning Outcomes  
4. Fundamental understanding of research tools that will help students plan for 
and evaluate the effectiveness of Digital Humanities methods including a 
multitude of platforms such as social media and web tools. 
5. Understand what data mean in different contexts 
6. Capture, collect, and analyse a variety of data types related to Digital 
Humanities research project  
 
Fractal Course Contents  
 
Fractal 1: Introduction to Data Science (DHL7XX1) 
 
Components of Fractal 1 from  Introduction to Data Science (M.Tech DCS 
Program) 
Data preparation, Data pre -processing, Data Cleaning, Data Integration, Data 
Transformation, Data Reduction, Redundancy Removal, Data storage, Data 
Handling, Data Query, Data Representation and Exploration [14 lectures] 
 
120 
 
Text Books 
4. Kotu, V. and Deshpande, B. (2018) Data Science: Concepts and Practice, 
Morgan Kaufmann.  
5. Saltz, J.S. and Stanton, J.M. (2017) An Introduction to Data Science, SAGE 
Publications.  
6. Kelleher, J. D., and Tierney, (2018) Data Science, MIT Press Reference Books  
 
Reference Books 
3. Moreira, J., Carvalho, A. and Horvath, T. (2018) A General Introduction to 
Data Analytics, John Wiley & Sons.  
4. Mayer-Schonberger, V. and Cukier, K., (2013) Big data: The essential guide 
to work, life and learning in the age of insight, John Murray Publications.  
 
 
 
Fractal 2: Qualitative and Quantitative Analyses (DHL7XX2) [1-0-0] 
 
Introduction: Research Question, Research Design, an introduction to research 
methods in digital humanities and mapping the departure from traditional research 
methods [2 lectures] 
 
Overview of Research Methods: Quantitative data collection and analysis, Survey 
design and analysis; Interviews, focus groups and participant observation; 
Discourse and Content Analysis [3 lectures]  
 
Research Methods in Digital Humanities: Case Studies and projects in Digital 
Humanities; Research method as discipline - how digital humanities has been 
expanding through deployment of digital methods to study society, culture, 
philosophy and language [4 lectures] 
 
Techniques of data collection and analysis: Document Image Processing, OCR 
Techniques and its challenges, NLP Introduction, and its applications, Qualitative 
Analysis - Themes, Patterns, Coding using NVivo and MaxQDA [5 lectures] 
 
References Books 
 
121 
 
3. Bryman, Alan (2014), Social Science Research Methods, Oxford University 
Press: Oxford. 
4. Levenberg, Nielsen, Tai, et. al. (2018), Research Methods for Digital 
Humanities, Palgrave Macmillan: New York.  
 
 
Fractal 3: Visualization Analysis and Design (DHL7XX3) [1-0-0] 
 
Introduction: Design Effectiveness, Abstraction (Data and Task), Marks and 
Channels, Analysis and Validation [7 lectures] 
 
Interaction Design: Arranging data, Spatial data, Network and Trees, Map Color and 
Other Channels, Views, Applications, User Experience [ 7 Lectures] 
 
Hands-on Exercises 
3. Visualizing Quantitative and Qualitative Data. 
4. Use case-based user experience design. 
 
References Books 
3. William Lidwell, Kritina Holden, Jill Butler (2010), Universal Principles of 
Design, Rockport Publishers. 
4. Tamara Munzner (2014), Visualization Analysis & Design, CRC Press. 
 
Online-course material 
3. Data Science and Visualization, Provided by Harvard University (HarvardX), 
https://www.edx.org/course/data-science-visualization-2 
4. NPTEL Course, Data Visualization in R, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106106179/11 
 
 
 
 
 
Title Selected Topics in Digital Humanities - I Number DHL8XX0 
122 
 
Department IDRP-DH L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite DHL7XX0 Fundamentals of Digital Humanities 
OR 
DHL7XX0 Digital Methods and Tools 
  
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Expose the students to the latest upcoming fields in the area of Digital Humanities 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply the knowledge of recent topics to specific research areas in the field of Digital 
Humanities 
 
Contents  
The topic clouds for the course include contemporary topics in Digital Humanities and 
may be updated according to the instructor. 
 
Textbook  
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
  
123 
 
Title Selected Topics in Digital Humanities - II Number DHL8XX0 
Department IDRP-DH L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite DHL7XX0 Fundamentals of Digital Humanities 
OR 
DHL7XX0 Digital Methods and Tools 
  
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Expose the students to the latest upcoming fields in the area of Digital Humanities 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply the knowledge of recent topics to specific research areas in the field of Digital 
Humanities 
 
Contents  
The topic clouds for the course include contemporary topics in Digital Humanities and 
may be updated according to the instructor. 
 
Textbook  
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
 
124 
 
Title Selected Topics in Digital Humanities - III Number DHL8XX0 
Department IDRP-DH L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite DHL7XX0 Fundamentals of Digital Humanities 
OR 
DHL7XX0 Digital Methods and Tools 
  
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Expose the students to the latest upcoming fields in the area of Digital Humanities 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply the knowledge of recent topics to specific research areas in the field of Digital 
Humanities 
 
Contents  
The topic clouds for the course include contemporary topics in Digital Humanities and may be 
updated according to the instructor. 
 
Textbook  
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
 
 
125 
 
 
 
 
 
Ph.D. Programme 
 
In 
 
Quantum Information and Computation (QIC) 
 
Inter Disciplinary Research Platform 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
126 
 
Title Introduction to Quantum 
Information 
Number QCL6XX0 
Department IDRP (QC) L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide fundamentals of quantum information and computation 
2. Impart the knowledge of modeling efficiencies of a protocol in real experimental 
conditions 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
1. Use the concepts taught in class to various aspects of quantum information, 
communication and cryptography 
2. Understand and appreciate the technological evolution at theoretical and experimental 
front in QIC 
 
Contents  
QCL6XX1: Quantum entanglement and non-locality [1-0-0] 
Quantum Entanglement, correlations and Separability:  Review of linear algebra and 
basic laws of quantum mechanics, concept of bits and qubits, quantum gates, quantum 
parallelism, quantum algorithms, density operators and its applications 
Classical and quantum correlations, separability criterion, separable and entangled 
states, measures of two -qubit and multiqubit entanglement, Bell -type inequalities, 
discord (14 Lectures) 
  
QCL6XX2: Noise and Applications of Entanglement [2-0-0] 
Quantum Noise : Classical and Markov Processes, Quantum Operations, Examples of 
Quantum Noise and Quantum Operations, Applications of Quantum Operations, 
Limitations of the Quantum Operations Formalism (7 Lectures) 
Applications: Cryptography, quantum teleportation, dense coding, entanglement 
swapping, secret sharing, quantum games (14 Lectures))  
Effects of noise on quantum information and computation (7 Lectures) 
  
Textbooks 
1. Nielsen, M. A. and Chuang, I. L., (2000) Quantum Computation and Quantum 
Information, 10th edition, Cambridge University Press. 
2. Vedral, V., (2006) Introduction to Quantum Information Science, 1st edition, Oxford 
University Press 
 
Reference Books 
1. Griffiths, D. J., (2006) Introduction to Quantum Mechanics, 2nd edition, Pearson 
Prentice Hall. 
2. Bouwmeester, D., Ekert, A. and Zeilinger, A., (2000) The Physics of Quantum 
Information, 2nd edition, Springer. 
3. Bellac, M. L., (2006) A Short Introduction to Quantum Information and Quantum 
Computation, 1st edition, Cambridge University Press. 
Self Learning Material  
1. Goswami, D., Quantum Computing, Mathematics for Chemistry, NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur 
     https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc18_cy07/preview 
 
 
 
 
127 
 
Title Quantum Computing Number QCL7XX0 
Department IDRP (QC) L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Impart mathematical framework of Quantum Computation to students familiar with 
basic concepts of quantum mechanics and quantum information 
2. Discuss advanced topics and State-of-the-Art research in quantum information and 
computation (QIC) 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
1. Use the concepts taught in class to various aspects of quantum information,     
communication and cryptography 
2. Understand and appreciate the technological evolution at theoretical and experimental 
front in QIC 
 
Contents  
Mathematical Preliminaries:  Quantum Mechanics, Matrix representations of quantum 
states and operators, Cauchy-Schwartz and Triangle Inequalities, Classical and Quantum 
Correlations (6 Lectures) 
Notions of Quantum Information: Classical and Quantum state Registers, Pure and Mixed 
states, Reduction and Purification of states, Quantum Channels, Completely Positive and 
trace Preserving Maps (6 Lectures) 
Entropy: Quantitative bounds on Shannon and relative Entropy, Von -Neumann and 
quantum relative entropy, Klein‟s inequality, Concavity an d subadditivity of von 
Neumann entropy, Strong subadditivity of von Neumann entropy, Accessible 
Information, Holevo information (8 Lectures) 
Entanglement and Nonlocality:  Separability Criteria, Classical, Separable and Entangled 
states, Local Operations an d Classical Communications, Distillable entanglement and 
entanglement cost, Bound entanglement, Bell‟s Inequality and Nonlocality, Nonlocality in 
multiqubit Systems, Entanglement Measures (12 Lectures) 
Quantum Error Correction:  Bit flip and phase flip code s, Quantum Hamming Bound, 
Calderbank-Shor-Steane codes, Gottesman -Knil theorem, Fault -tolerant quantum 
computation, quantum algorithms and cryptography (10 Lectures)    
 
Textbooks 
1. Nielsen, M. A. and Chuang, I. L., Quantum Computation and Quantum Information, 
Cambridge University Press, 2000 
2. Vedral, V., Introduction to Quantum Information Science, Oxford University Press, 
2006 
 
Reference Books 
1. Griffiths, D. J., Introduction to Quantum Mechanics, Pearson Prentice Hall, 2006 
2. Bouwmeester, D., Ekert, A. and Zeilinger, A., The Physics of Quantum Information, 
Springer, 2000 
3.  
Self Learning Material  
1.Goswami, D., Quantum Computing, Mathematics for Chemistry, NPTEL Course 
Material, Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur 
     https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc18_cy07/preview 
 
 
 
 
128 
 
Title Facets  of Quantum Information Number QCL7XX0 
Department IDRP (QC) L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
 The Instructor will: 
1.   Provide an appreciation for the classical and quantum aspects of information theory.  
2. Help in developing an understanding of the exciting world of quantum computation 
and information 
  
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.   Understand the fundamental principles of quantum information. 
2.   Appreciate  some modern applications of quantum mechanics. 
  
       Contents  
Review of basics of quantum information and computation (4 Lectures) 
 
Entanglement and Separability criter ion, Entanglement measures, Purification and 
distillation, multi qubit entanglement, nonlocal correlations, multi qubit Bell -type 
inequalities (12 Lectures) 
 
Quantum Computation: Quantum logic gates; quantum Fourier transform; quantum 
algorithm; physical realization of quantum computers ( 8 Lectures) 
 
Classical Information and Communication: What is information and how can it be used? 
Concepts of communication channels; Shannon entropy; coding theory and 
communication complexity. (8 Lectures) 
 
Quantum Infor mation: What is information theory from the perspective of quantum 
mechanics? Quantum entropy; quantum mutual information; fidelity. (6 Lectures)  
 
Some Unconventional Models of Computing: Brief introduction to cellular computation 
and communication; chaos based computing; DNA computing.  (4 Lectures) 
  
 
Textbook:  
 
1. Nielsen Michael, A. and Chuang   Isaac , I., Quantum Computation and Quantum 
Information,   Cambridge University Press, 2010. 
 
Self-Learning Material: 
1.Ghosh, D., Quantum Information and Computing, Indian Institute of Technology 
Bombay, https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/115101092/. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
129 
 
Title Quantum Cryptography and 
Coding 
Number QCL6XX0 
Department IDRP (QC) L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
 The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce the students to the fascinating field of cryptography and coding, with 
specific emphasis on the quantum aspects of it. 
2. Highlight a number of facets of these theories having some parallel with the more 
familiar classical world. 
  
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
        1.Understand the fundamental principles of quantum cryptography and coding.  
 2.Become familiar with the modern aspects of the theory, including its experimental 
implementation. 
 
Contents  
What is cryptography? Various aspects of modern cryptography; number theoretic 
concepts. 
Classical Coding Theory: Concepts of entropy, mutual in formation and related aspects; 
Shannon's coding theorem.  (10 Lectures) 
 
Basic concepts of Quantum Mechanics: From the perspective of information and 
cryptography:  Hilbert space, states, operators: Hermitian and Unitary, simple 
measurements. (5 Lectures) 
 
Some basic no-go theorems: With implications to cryptography. (2 Lectures) 
 
Some basic applications pertinent to quantum cryptography: Entanglement, 
teleportation, dense coding. (6 Lectures) 
 
Various Quantum Cryptography protocols: Quantum Key Distributio n protocols: BB84, 
B92, Ekert protocol, Goldenberg -Vaidman, counterfactual quantum cryptography; 
protocols of quantum dialogue; Quantum secret sharing protocol; Quantum cheating and 
cryptography; Protecting information and QKA (quantum key agreement); Shor 's 
factoring algorithm and modern cryptography; Experimental progress in quantum 
cryptography. (15 Lectures) 
 
Quantum Coding: Quantum aspects of Shannon coding theorem. (4 Lectures) 
 
Textbook:  
1. Nielsen Michael, A. and Chuang   Isaac , I., Quantum Computation and Quantum 
Information,   Cambridge University Press, 2010. 
  
Self-Learning Material: 
1.MIT Open Course, 18.435J  “Quantum Computation”, by Shor. P.;  Fall 2003, 
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/mathematics/18-435j-quantum-computation-fall-2003/ 
 
  
130 
 
 
 
 
Ph.D. Programme 
 
In 
 
Smart Healthcare 
 
Inter Disciplinary Research Platform 
 
  
131 
 
PhD program in IDRP Smart healthcare 
1. Introduction: 
The Smart Health Care IDRP aspires to create significant scientific and technological 
advancements in the area of Healthcare by bringing together a multidisciplinary team of 
scientists working in the int erface of Biology, Chemistry, healthcare & Engineering. The 
research is intended to focus on designing and developing sustainable solutions for 
point-of-care health devices, drug discovery, affordable diagnostics, bio -compatible 
implants, and remote health  care, including telemedicine. The IDRP platform is expected 
to support the development of various eHealth and mHealth based solutions for 
improving the quality of healthcare and making it available to large segments of the 
society. 
 
2. The major objectives are: 
 Augmenting existing methods for medical research using machine learning and 
artificial intelligence based approaches 
 Designing new and optimizing existing point-of-care health devices  
 Identifying novel methods for early diagnosis and personalized treatments 
 Creating a platform to use various electronic, mechanical, and bio -sensors for 
improving the remote health care facilities  
 
3. Expected Graduate Attributes 
Graduates will 
1. Be able to think critically and solve problems that are necessary for employment 
in biomedical, biotechnology, pharmaceutical industries, National research labs 
and Academic institutions at the global level. 
2. Develop a sense of ownership on the National missions for technology 
development, which will cater to societal needs i n the area of affordable 
healthcare. 
3. Be exceptionally well trained in the laboratory enabling them to conduct high -
quality, reproducible research. 
4. Be able to read, understand and review intellectual property documents and 
recognize their rights. 
5. Be able to  express their research ideas and present their data clearly in written 
and spoken format. 
6. Develop a strong work ethic and understand ethical considerations in biological 
research, which are both necessary for high-quality research. 
7. Develop healthy time ma nagement skills to plan and manage laboratory work as 
well as other miscellaneous research -associated demands on their time to 
effectively meet deadlines. 
132 
 
4.  Learning outcome: 
Graduates will 
• Be introduced to cutting -edge, interdisciplinary research areas lik e Diagnostics & 
Therapeutics development, Machine learning and Artificial Intelligence for 
healthcare, Novel drug development, Biomedical Instrumentation design,   
Biomedical Imaging& Image processing, Systems & Synthetic Biology, Biosensors 
and Biomaterials Engineering. 
• Be exposed to common problems that are prevalent in the domains of affordable 
healthcare such as sustainable point of care diagnostic devices, personalized 
medicine, remote healthcare, bioimaging for specific diagnosis, and medical 
devices & implants  
• Receive effective, hands -on laboratory training as a part of laboratory courses 
and short -term research projects that are designed to teach research 
methodology and common lab techniques. 
• Be introduced to Patents and other intellectual property  documents, the rights 
that they grant and necessary considerations while filing patents / technology 
that is protected by patents. 
• Develop their research communication skills by participating in seminars, journal 
clubs; manuscript writing and research grant writing workshops. 
• Receive training on building a work ethic by being a part of research groups 
working towards a common goal. Graduates will also appreciate the ethical and 
safety considerations while conducting biomedical research. 
• Be taught how to prioritize items on their schedule and how to budget time across 
the spectrum of activities including research and other necessary tasks. 
5. Essential Topic clouds 
Drug  
Development 
Point of care 
diagnostic device 
Systems 
Biology 
Artificial 
Intelligence & 
Machine 
learning 
Biomedical 
devices & 
implants 
Searching 
Microbiomes for 
novel antimicrobials 
 
Organic synthesis 
 
Drug screening & 
testing 
Sensor materials 
 
Biomarkers 
 
Biomolecular 
interactions 
 
Surface 
Immuno-
technology 
 
Disease 
processes 
diagnostics 
therapeutics 
 
Synthetic Biology 
Machine learning 
Artificial 
Intelligence 
Tissue 
engineering 
 
Biomechanics 
 
Artificial Organs 
 
133 
 
 
Animal Models 
 
Personalized 
medicine 
 
AI for healthcare 
 
 
 
functionalization 
 
Sensor 
development 
 
Qualitative and 
Quantitative Assay 
 
Biosignals 
 
Biosignal 
Processing 
 
Vaccine 
development 
 
Identification of 
novel biomarkers 
 
Understanding 
disease 
development 
Biomaterials 
 
 
 
6. Program Structure 
Cat Course Title L-T-P Credits  Cat Course Title L-T-P Credits 
I Semester   II Semester 
PE Elective 1 3-0-0 3 
 
PE Elective 1 3-0-0 3 
PE 
Elective 2 
 
3-0-0 3 
 
PE 
Elective 2 
 
3-0-0 3 
PE Elective 3 3-0-0 3 
 
PE Elective 3 3-0-0 3 
PE Elective 3 3-0-0 3 
 
PE Elective 3 3-0-0 3 
         
Total  12  Total (Graded + Non-graded) 12 
III Semester  IV Semester 
PE Elective 2-0-0 2      
134 
 
TH Thesis 0-0-
20 10  TH Thesis 0-0-24 12 
Total 12  Total 12 
V Semester  VI Semester 
TH Thesis 0-0-
24 12  TH Thesis 0-0-24 12 
Total 12  Total 12 
VII Semester  VIII Semester 
TH Thesis 0-0-4 2      
Total  2    
7. Credit Requirements for the degree 
Credit requirements 
Student with M Sc Students with M Tech Students with B Tech 
Course work credits 30 
Thesis 48 
 
Course work 12 
Thesis 48 
Course work credits 30 
Thesis 48 
 
 
 
 
  
135 
 
Courses 
(In addition to the courses mentioned below, a student can opt for any course floated in other IDRP 
programs relevant to the thesis) 
 
Title Software and Data Engineering Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.  Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Discuss techniques to manage a large amount of data 
2.  Provide mechanisms to design and develop data-intensive computing systems 
 
Learning Outcomes  
     The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Design complex end-to-end data pipeline for data processing 
2.  Critically identify and use the tools for data handling and management 
3.  Use modern software technologies to design and develop data analytical systems 
 
 
Contents 
CSL7XX0Cloud Computing and Virtualization 1-0-0 [1] 
Basics of complex software design: Concept of modular software, microservices, 
communication, 4+1 architectural views and patterns (5 lectures) 
Cloud Computing: Architecture of cluster computing, design of data centers, open data center 
platforms, fault-tolerant system design (5 lectures) 
Virtualization: Type-1 and Type-2 virtualization, virtual machine, containers, dockers (4 
lectures)  
CSL7XX0Data Management 1-0-0 [1] 
Data Management: Structured data, relational database management, unstructured data, 
semi-structured data,  Nosql database management (mongodb), column database, graph 
database, XML, JSON, HDFS, Handling drift in data, sensor data reliability at software and 
algorithmic level, sensor data analysis techniques (14 lectures)  
CSL7XX0Data Intensive Processing Systems 1-0-0 [1] 
Data Intensive Processing Systems: Architecture of large scale data processing systems, 
Hadoop, Apache Spark, Storm, parallel data processing concepts such as map-reduce, directed 
acyclic graph, resilient distributed datasets, dynamic resource allocation, partial & shared 
computation, storage architecture  (14 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1.  Bass L., Clements P., Kazman R., (2012), Software Architecture in Practice, 3rd edition, 
Addison-Wesley Professional 
2.  Martin K., (2017), Designing Data-Intensive Applications: The Big Ideas Behind Reliable, 
Scalable, and Maintainable Systems, 1st Edition,O'Reilly Media 
 
Self Learning Material  
1.  Tylor,R.N., Medvidovic,N. and Dashofy,E.M., (2014), Software Architecture Foundation: 
Theory and Practice, Wiley  
 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 
2. International Conference on Data Engineering  
 
136 
 
 
Title Algorithms for Big Data Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 
Offered for M.Tech. 1st Year, Ph.D. 1st Year  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives  
     The Instructor will:  
1.  Introduce some algorithmic techniques developed for handling large amounts of data.  
2.  Emphasize on both theoretical as well as practical aspects of such algorithms.  
Learning Outcomes  
     The students are expected to have the ability to:  
1.  Analyze existing algorithms as well as design novel algorithms pertaining to big data.  
 
Contents 
Sketching and Streaming: Extremely small-space data structures(4 lectures)  
 
Numerical linear algebra:  Algorithms for big matrices, Regression, Low -rank a pproximation, 
Matrix completion (8 lectures)  
 
Compressed Sensing: Sparse signals, Linear measurements, Signal recovery (8 lectures)  
 
External memory and cache -obliviousness: Minimizing I/O for large datasets, Algorithms and 
data structures such as B-trees, Buffer trees, Multiway mergesort (8 lectures)  
 
Reference Books  
Markovsky I, (2014), Low Rank Approximation: Algorithms, Implementation, Applications, 
Springer 
Eldar Y C., Kutyniok G. (2012), Compressed Sensing: Theory and Applications, Cambridge 
University Press.  
 
Self Learning Material 
1.   Department of Computer Science, Harvard University, Algorithms for Big Data 
 
 
 
 
  
137 
 
Title Machine Learning-1 Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. 1st Year, Ph.D. 1st Year Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite None    
 
Objectives  
     The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide motivation and understanding of the need and importance of Machine Learning 
in today‟s world  
2.  Provide details about various algorithms in Machine Learning  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Develop a sense of Machine Learning in the modern context, and independently work   
on problems relating to Machine Learning  
2. Design and program efficient algorithms related to Machine Learning, train models,  
conduct experiments, and deliver ML-based applications  
 
Contents  
 
CSL7XX1: Introduction to Machine Learning: Supervised Learning 1-0-0[1] 
Introduction: Motivation, Different types of learning, Linear regression, Logistic regression (2 
lectures)  
Gradient Descent:  Introduction, Stochastic Gradi ent Descent, Subgradients, Stochastic 
Gradient Descent for risk minimization (2 lectures)  
Support Vector Machines:  Hard SVM, Soft SVM, Optimality conditions, Duality, Kernel trick, 
Implementing Soft SVM with Kernels (4 lectures)  
Decision Trees: Decision Tree algorithms, Random forests (2 lectures)  
Neural Networks: Feedforward neural networks, Expressive power of neural networks, SGD 
and Backpropagation (3 lectures)  
Model selection and validation: Validation for model selection, k-fold cross-validation, Training-
Validation-Testing split, Regularized loss minimization (1 lectures)  
 
CSL7XX2: Introduction to Machine Learning: Unsupervised Learning and Generative 
Models 1-0-0[1] 
Nearest Neighbour: k-nearest neighbour, Curse of dimensionality (1 lecture)  
Clustering: Linkage-based clustering algorithms, k -means algorithm, Spectral clustering (3 
lectures)  
Dimensionality reduction:  Principal Component Analysis, Random projections, Compressed 
sensing (2 lectures)  
Generative Models: Maximum likelihood estimat or, Naive Bayes, Linear Discriminant Analysis, 
Latent variables and Expectation-maximization algorithm, Bayesian learning (5 lectures)  
Feature Selection and Generation: Feature selection, Feature transformations, Feature learning 
(3 lectures)  
CSL7XX3: In troduction to Machine Learning: Computational Learning Theory and 
Deep Learning 1-0-0[1] 
Statistical Learning Framework: PAC learning, Agnostic PAC learning, Bias -complexity tradeoff, 
No free lunch theorem, VC dimension, Structural risk minimization, Adaboost (7 lectures)  
Foundations of Deep Learning: DNN, CNN, RNN, Autoencoders (7 lectures)  
Textbook 
1. Shalev -Shwartz,S., Ben -David,S., (2014), Understanding Machine Learning: From 
Theory to Algorithms, Cambridge University Press  
 
Reference Books  
1. Mitchell Tom (1997). Machine Learning, Tata McGraw-Hill  
 
 
Self Learning Material  
138 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.   Department of Computer Science, Stanford University,  
      https://see.stanford.edu/Course/CS229  
139 
 
Title Machine Learning II Number CSL8XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. 1st Year, Ph.D. 1st Year Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Machine Learning-1   
 
Objectives  
     The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide technical details about various recent algorithms and software platforms related 
to Machine Learning with specific focus on Deep Learning.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.   Design and program efficient algorithms related to recent machine learning techniques,  
      train models, conduct experiments, and develop real-world ML-based applications and 
      products   
 
Contents  
CSL7XX1: Machine Learning II: Introduction to Deep Learning 1-0-0[1] 
Model Search: Optimization, Regularization, AutoML (4 lectures)  
Deep Networks: Attention layers, Gated CNNs, Graph Neural Networks (8 lectures)  
Applications: Neural language models (2 lectures)  
 
CSL7XX2: Machine Learning II: Representation Learning & Structured Models 1 -0-
0[1] 
Representation Learning: Unsupervised pre-training, transfer learning and domain adaptation, 
distributed representation, discovering underlying causes (7 lectures)  
Structured models:  learning about depe ndencies, inference and approximate inference, 
sampling and Monte Carlo Methods, Importance Sampling, Gibbs Sampling, Partition Function, 
MAP inference and Sparse Coding, Variational Inference (7 lectures)  
 
CSL7XX3: Machine Learning II: Deep Generative Models 1-0-0[1] 
Deep Generative Models: Deep Belief Networks, Variational Autoencoder, Generative 
Adversarial Network (GAN), Deep Convolutional GAN, Autoencoder GANs, iGAN, pix2pix, 
CycleGAN, Conditional GANs, StackGAN (14 lectures)  
 
Laboratory Experiments 
Overview of Deep Learning platforms such Tensorflow and PyTorch.  
 
Textbook 
1.Goodfellow,I., Bengio.,Y., and Courville,A., (2016), Deep Learning, The MIT Press  
 
Reference Books  
1. Charniak, E. (2019), Introduction to deep learning, The MIT Press.  
 
Self Learning Material 
1.   https://www.deeplearningbook.org/ 
  
140 
 
 
Title Artificial Intelligence I Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. 1st Year, Ph.D. 1st Year  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives  
     The Instructor will: 
1.  Cover various paradigms that come under the broad umbrella of AI. 
 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to:  
1.  Develop an understanding of where and how AI can be used. 
 
Contents 
Introduction (1 lecture)  
Propositional logic (8 lectures)  
Search: Uninformed strategies (BFS, DFS, Dijkstra), Informed strategies (A* search, heuristic  
functions, hill-climbing), Adversarial search (Minimax algorithm, Alpha-beta pruning) (10  
lectures)  
Predicate logic: Knowledge representation, Resolution (6 lectures)  
Rule-based systems: Natural language parsing, Context free grammar (3 lectures)  
Constraint satisfaction problems (4 lectures)  
Planning: State space search, Planning Graphs, Partial order planning (4 lectures)  
Uncertain Reasoning: Probabilistic reasoning, Bayesian Networks, Dempster-Shafer theory,  
Fuzzy logic (6 lectures)  
 
Textbook  
1.Russel,S., and Norvig,P., (2015), Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, 3rd Edition,  
      Prentice Hall 
 
Reference Books  
1. Research literature  
 
Self Learning Material  
1.   Department of Computer Science, University of California, Berkeley,  
http://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLD52D2B739E4D1C5F 
2.   NPTEL: Artificial Intelligence, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106105077/ 
 
  
141 
 
Title Artificial Intelligence II Number CSL8XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. 1st Year, Ph.D. 1st Year  Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Artificial Intelligence-1   
 
Objectives  
     The Instructor will: 
1.  Cover modern paradigms of AI that go beyond traditional learning.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
     The students are expected to have the ability to:  
1.  Develop an understanding of modern concepts in AI and where they can be used. 
2.  Design, implement and apply novel AI techniques based on emerging real-world  
     requirements. 
 
Contents 
CSL8XX1: Artificial Intelligence: Probabilistic Reasoning and Knowledge 
Representation 1-0-0[1] 
Probabilistic Reasoning over time: Hidden Markov Models, Kalman Filters, Dynamic  
Bayesian Networks (7 lectures)  
Knowledge Representation: Ontological engineering, Semantic Networks, Description Logics  
(7 lectures)  
 
CSL8XX1: Artificial Intelligence: Making Decisions 1-0-0[1] 
Making decisions: Utility theory, utility functions, decision networks, sequential  
decision problems, Partially Observable MDPs, Game Theory (14 lectures)  
 
CSL8XX1: Artificial Intelligence: Reinforcement Learning 1-0-0[1] 
Reinforcement Learning: Passive RL, Active RL, Generalization in RL, Policy 
Search, Deep Reinforcement Learning (14 lectures)  
 
Textbook  
1.Russel,S., and Norvig,P., (2015), Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, 3rd Edition,  
      Prentice Hall 
 
Reference Books  
1. Yang, Q. (1997), Intelligent Planning: A decomposition and abstraction based approach, 
Springer Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg.  
 
  
142 
 
Title Mechanical Behavior of Materials Number MTL7320 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–2-0 
[4] 
Offered for M.Tech. and Ph.D. Type Elective  
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives 
1. To provide background on the mechanisms of deformation in engineering materials, 
and on the evolution of material microstructure when subjected to mechanical 
stress during materials processing and engineering applications 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Ability to design materials with improved mechanical properties and identify failure 
mechanisms in materials for engineering applications 
2. To measure important mechanical properties and correlate with the microstructure 
 
Contents 
Continuum Theory of Deformation: 3D-state of stress and strain, Mohr‟s Circle, Generalized 
Hooke‟s Law and introductory theory of elasticity, stress and strain invariants, Yield 
Criteria, Yield surface and normality (6 lectures) 
Defects in Crystals:  Vacancies and interstitials, edge, screw and mixed dislocations, 
Burgers vector, slip, cross -slip and climb, stress fields around edge and screw 
dislocations, strain energy of dislocations, dislocation -dislocation interaction: Peach -
Koehler force on dislocation, image forces, dislocations in different crystal structures (10 
lectures) 
Twinning in Crystalline Solids:  Deformation twinning, geometry of twin formation, twin 
shape, stress requirement for twinning, twinning in HCP, BCC, and FCC crystals (4 
lectures) 
Fracture and Toughening Mechanisms: Theoretical fracture strength of a material and 
Griffith’s Law, modes of fracture, fracture toughness, G and R -curve, brittle and ductile 
fracture, toughening mechanisms in metals, ceramics, and polymers (8 lectures) 
Fatigue and Creep: Introduction to fatigue, stress and strain -life approach, cyclic stress -
strain curve, fatigue crack propagation, high temperature deformation, fatigue -creep 
interaction (8 lectures) 
Deformation of Polymers: Elasticity in dilute and semi -dilute polymer networks, nonlinear 
elastic deformation, rubber elasticity: Mooney-Rivlin and Ogden models (6 lectures) 
Laboratory Experiments 
Measurement of uniaxial monotonic stress -strain response of metals, ceramics, and polymers, 
Measurement of hardne ss via spherical and Vickers indentation and correlation with yield 
strength for ductile and brittle materials, The effect of grain size on mechanical properties, The 
effects of strain rate and temperature on yield strength, Recrystallization of cold rolle d metals, 
Measurement of impact fracture toughness using Charpy/Izod impact test, Fracture surface 
interpretation,  Creep of a 60%Sn-40%Pb Solder wire at room temperature. 
Text Books 
1. Dieter, G.E. (1986), Mechanical Metallurgy, 3rd Edition, McGraw-Hill Book Company. 
2. Courtney, T. H., (2005), Mechanical Behaviour of Materials , 2nd Edition, Waveland 
Press Inc. 
3. Shetty, M. N., (2013), Dislocations and Mechanical Behavior of Materials , Prentice 
Hall India Learning Private Limited 
 
Self-Learning Materials 
1. Hertzberg, R.W., (1976), Deformation and Fracture Mechanics of Engineering 
Materials, John Wiley and Sons 
2. McClintock,F.A., and Argon,A.S., (1966), Mechanical Behavior of Materials , Addison-
Wesley. 
 
143 
 
Title Frontiers  in Organic Chemistry Number CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Give an in-depth exposure to the latest advances in organic synthesis 
2. Inculcating in students a research-oriented approach towards solving synthetic organic 
chemistry problems 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Advance their knowledge in strategizing and synthesis of complex organic compounds  
2. Systematically read, understand and interpret the research reported in journals 
3. Develop skills of scientific presentations and interpersonal skills  
 
Contents 
Protecting Group: Selectivity and requirement of protecting groups, protecting groups and 
their deprotection (5 lectures) 
Advanced Radical Chemistry: Radical substitution reactions, coupling reactions, radical 
mediated cyclizations, addition reaction involving radicals, radical chain reactions (5 
lectures) 
Cycloaddition Reactions: 1,3-dipolar cycloadditions, higher order cycloadditions, asymmetric 
cycloadditions. (5 lectures) 
Advanced Enolate Chemistry: Diastereoselective aldol reactions, Evan‟s chiral auxiliary, 
Ender‟s chiral auxiliary, diastereofacial selectivity, asymmetric aldol reactions, 
Organocatalyzed aldol reactions (7 lectures) 
Total synthesis of complex molecules: total synthesis of penicillin, estrone, sparteine, 
prostaglandins, synthesis of important pharmaceuticals (12 lectures) 
C-H functionalization and C-H activation: Transition metal free reactions, Pd, Cu, Rh  
catalyzed C-H activation reactions, remote C-H functionalization and activation reactions (8 
lectures) 
 
Text books 
1. Carriera, E.M., and Kvaerno,L., (2009), Classics in Stereoselective synthesis, Wiley-VCH 
2. Kurti,L., Czako,B., (2005), Strategic Applications of Named Reactions in Organic 
Synthesis, Elsevier 
3. Carey,F.A., Sundberg,R.J., (2007), Advanced Organic Chemistry, Part B: Reactions and 
Synthesis, 5th Edition, Plenum 
 
Reference books  
1. Hudlicky,T., and Reed,J.W., (2007) The Way of Synthesis, Wiley-VCH 
2. Nicolaou,K.C., and Snyder,S.A., (2003), Classics in Total Synthesis-II: Further Targets, 
Strategies, Methods, Wiley-VCH 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Punniyamurthy,T., Catalytic Asymmetric Synthesis, NPTEL Course Material, Department 
of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104103067/ 
 
  
144 
 
Title Theory and Applications of 
Spectroscopic Techniques  
Number CYL6XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Compulsory 
 
Objectives 
 
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce to theoretical background of spectroscopic methods along with their 
instrumentation and application.  
2. Enable students to use such methods whenever needed by giving hands on experience 
with available instruments in the institute. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
 
The students are expected to: 
1. Apply spectroscopic methods as analytical tool in chemistry, biology, material science, 
medicine. 
2. Operate various spectrometers available in the institute. 
 
Contents 
 
CYL6XX1: Electronic Spectroscopy [1-0-0] 
Properties of electromagnetic radiation, interaction of radiation with matter, Stimulated and 
Spontaneous processes, Einstein coefficient, Rabi Oscillation, intensity of spectral line and line 
shape, Fourier Transformation, General understanding of spectroscopic selection rule. UV-vis and 
Fluorescence Spectroscopy: Basic principles, Laws of photochemistry, Jablonski diagram, Frank -
Condon principle, quantum yield expression and Stern-Volmer equation, FRET. (14 lectures) 
 
CYL6XX2: Infrared and Raman Spectroscopy [1-0-0] 
Basic principle; Organic functional group identification through IR spectroscopy, IR and Raman 
activity. (14 lectures) 
 
CYL6XX3: NMR and EPR Spectroscopy [1-0-0] 
NMR Spectroscopy: Basic principle, Zeeman splitting, chemical shift and spin-spin coupling, 
introduction to AB, AX, AMX spin system, 1D 1H and 13C NMR for structure elucidation, 
Polarization transfer methods and NOE. EPR Spectroscopy: basic principle, Electron-nuclear 
hyperfine interaction, theory of first order EPR spectra, analysis of 1st Order spectra, example of 
EPR spectra of organic radicals and transition metal complexes.  (14 lectures) 
 
Textbooks 
1. Gunther, H., (1995), NMR Spectroscopy, 2nd Edition, Wiley 
2. Banwell, C. N., (1994), Fundamentals of Molecular Spectroscopy, 3rd Edition, Tata 
McGraw-Hill Book Company 
3. Lakowicz, J. R., (2006), Principles of Fluorescence Spectroscopy, 3rd Edition, Springer, 
New York 
 
Reference Books 
1.Bernath, P. F., (2005), Spectra of Atoms and Molecules, 2nd Edition, Oxford University 
Press 
145 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
2.Silverstein, R. M. and Webster, F. M., (2010), Spectroscopic Identification of Organic 
Compounds, 6th Edition, Wiley 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Mangal Sundar, K.,  Introduction to Quantum Chemistry and Molecular Spectroscopy, 
http:// http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104106083 
2. Trivedi, V. and Chaudhary, N., Bioanalytical Techniques and Bioinformatics, Department 
of Biotechnology, http:// http://nptel.ac.in/courses/ 102103044. 
3. Das, R., Principles and Applications of Electron Paramagnetic Resonance Spectroscopy, 
Department of Chemical Sciences, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/104106048/2 
146 
 
 
Title Principles of Drug Discovery Number BBL7XX1 
CSL7XX1 
CSL7XX2 
Department Bioscience & Bioengineering and Computer 
Science and engineering 
L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [2] 
Offered for M.Tech Type Elective  
Prerequisite None   
 
Objective 
The Instructor will: 
1. focus on route of drug design and discovery 
Learning Outcome 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. understand the principles of drug design and development 
Contents 
BBL7XX1: Principles of Drug Discovery [1-0-0] 
(fractal 1)drug targets, pharmacokinetics, administration and dosing, drug testing: in 
vivo and in vitro, drug discovery: natural lead, synthetic lead, combinatorial 
synthesis, pharmacokinetics based drug design, chemical development, process 
development, toxicology, pharmacology, drug metabolism, clinical trials, 
commercialization (14 lectures) 
CSL7XX0: Machine Learning-1 [2-0-0] 
(fractal 2) introduction, gradient descent, support vector machines, decision trees, 
neural networks (14 lectures) 
(fractal 3) nearest neighbour, clustering, dimensionality reduction, generative 
models, feature selection and generation (14 lectures) 
Textbook 
1. Stromgaard,K., Krogsgaard-Larsen,P., Madsen,U., Drug Design and Discovery, 5th 
Edition, CRC Press  
Self-Learning Material  
1. Department of Computer Science, Stanford University 
https://see.stanford.edu/Course/CS229 
 
147 
 
Title Introductory Chemical Biology Number BBL7XX0 
Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech Type Elective  
Prerequisite None   
Objective 
The Instructor will: 
1. build fundamental concept of interdisciplinary science, specially chemical biology 
 
Learning Outcome 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the importance of interdisciplinary sciences and its applications in 
bioengineering fields 
 
Contents 
Introduction: background and definition of chemical biology, overview of chemical biology, 
allied fields and their link with chemical biology, overview of protein structure and 
protein-protein interactions (14 lectures) 
Biomolecular-drug interaction: key discoveries in the field of chemical biology, few 
examples and journey through those discoveries, the use of unusual amino acids to probe 
biomolecular conformation, the use of novel fluorescence probe and applications, sirna as 
therapeutics, small molecule kinase inhibitors, gtp analogues as potential regulators for 
microtubule dynamics (14 lectures) 
Imaging: applications of small molecule as a probe for in vivo imaging, chemical tools for 
perturbation of protein-protein interactions, chemical platforms for protein-protein and 
protein-nucleic acid interactions (14 lectures) 
Textbook 
1. Chemical Biology: From Small Molecules to Systems Biology and Drug Design (Willey), 
Editor(s): Profs. Stuart L. Schreiber, Tarun M. Kapoor and Günther Wess 
Nature Chemical Biology, 2010, 6, 847-853 
Self Learning Material  
None 
 
 
 
148 
 
Title Algorithms in Biology Number BBL7XX0 
Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech Type Elective  
Prerequisite Nil   
Objectives:  
1. To  develop  an  understanding of  the  main  algorithmic   approaches  used  in  solving 
computational problems that arise in the analysis of biomolecular data (such as 
DNA/RNA/amino acid sequences, mass spectra of proteins, whole genomes, or gene 
expression levels). 
Learning outcomes:  
The students are expected to: 
1.  Understand various algorithms related to biological data analysis.  
2.  Develop new efficient algorithm to solve biological data. 
Contents 
Algorithms and Complexity: What is an algorithm?, Biological Algorithm versus Computer 
Algorithms, The change problem, Correct versus Incorrect Algorithms, Recursive 
Algorithms, Iterative versus Recursive Algorithms, Fast vs Slow Algorithms, Big -O 
Notation, Algorithm Design Techniq ues, Tractable versus Intractable Problems (10 
lectures) 
Greedy Algorithms:  Genome Rearrangements, Sorting by Reversals, Approximation 
Algorithms, Breakpoint: A different face of greed, A greedy approach to motif finding (10 
lectures) 
Dynamic programming algorithms: The power of DNA sequence comparison, the change 
problem revisited, the manhattan tourist problem, edit distance and alignments, longest 
common subsequences, global sequence alignment, local sequence alignment, alignment 
and gap penalties, multiple alignment, gene prediction. (10 lectures) 
Clustering and Trees:  Gene expression analysis, Hierarchical Clustering, k-means 
clustering, clustering and corrupted cliques, evolutionary trees, distance based tree 
reconstruction, Evolutionary trees and hie rarchical clustering, small parsimony problem, 
large parsimony problem (7 lectures) 
Gene selection algorithms: SAM, eBayes, Limma, CFS, mRMR, MRMS [5 lectures] 
Textbook 
1. Jones N. C. ,Pevzner   P. A.  (2014), An Introduction to Bioinformatics Algorithms, MIT 
Press 
Reference Books 1. Mitra S. and Acharya T. (2003), Data Mining: Multimedia, Soft 
Computing, and Bioinformatics, New York: John Wiley 
1.  Mitra S., Datta S., Perkins T. and Michailidis G. (2008), Introduction to Machine 
Learning and Bioinformatics, New York: Chapman & Hall/CRC Press. 
 
149 
 
Title Microbes as sensors Number BBL7XX0 
Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 1-0-0 [1] 
Offered for  Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
1. The instructor will discuss the methods by which living microbes can be used as 
sensors. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Students will have an ability to design live microbial based biosensors for 
sensing specific pollutants, marker for environment and/or health monitoring 
Contents 
Introduction: Advantages of using microbes as sensors, physical and chemical 
methods of microbial, immobilization. (4 lectures) 
Electrochemical microbial biosensor: Amperometric, potentiometric and 
conductimetric (5 lectures) 
Optical biosensors; bioluminescence, fluore scence, and calorimet ric based sensors 
(2 lectures). 
Metabolism based: Microbial sensors based on analysis of oxygen reduction rate or 
carbon di oxide production rate. (3 lectures) 
 Textbook 
No textbook. The research papers will serve as the reading materi al and reference 
material 
Reference Books 
1. Brock, et al., (2012), Biology of Microorganisms, 13 th edition Ben,jamin 
Cummings, Boston, MA. 
 
Online course material 
None 
 
 
150 
 
Title Immunodiagnostics and therapeutics Number  BBL7XX0 
Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–2 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. (MT) Program Type Elective 
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide an introduction to fundamentals techniques of clinical immunology and Immune 
based Diagnostics 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Immunology based diagnostics techniques for to create and 150nalyse diagnostics 
Contents 
Immunodiagnostics [14 lectures]: Selection of animals for immunological assays, 
Preparation of antigens, Immunization and methods of ble eding, Serum separation, 
Storage. Antibody titre by ELISA method. Double diffusion, Immuno -electrophoresis 
and Radial Immuno diffusion. Complement fixation test. Hybridoma technology and 
monoclonal antibody production. Lymphoproliferation by mitogen / antigen. 
Immunotherapeutics[14 lectures]: Active and passive immunization; Live, killed, 
attenuated, sub unit vaccines; Vaccine technology - Role and properties of adjuvants, 
recombinant DNA and protein based vaccines, plant -based vaccines, reverse 
vaccinology; Peptide vaccines, conjugate vaccines; Antibody genes and antibody 
engineering- chimeric and hybrid monoclonal antibodies; Catalytic antibodies and 
generation of immunoglobulin gene libraries 
Laboratory Experiments [12 experiments]: 
Immunoblotting for specific antigens, Dot blot assay, Blood smear identification of leucocytes 
by Giemsa stain. Quantification of Phagocytic activity, Separation of mononuclear cells by 
Ficoll-Hypaque. Immunohistochemistry (direct and indirect peroxidase assay), detection of 
Salmonella genus which causes enteric or Typhoid Fever by using qualitative slide 
agglutination test (Widal test), Detection of Treponemes responsible for veneral diseases such 
as  syphilis (VDRL) test, IgG Purification technique (Protein A Based, Spin Column) 
Textbook 
1.  R.A. Goldsby., Thomas,J.K., and Barbara,A, Osborne., Kuby Immunology, 
Freeman,2002, 6th Edition 
151 
 
2. Stanier, R. Y., General Microbiology, W.H. Freeman and Co., 2009. 
3. Pelczar, M.J., Chan, E. C. S., Krieg, N.R., Microbiology, Tata McGraw – Hill Education, 2001 
Reference Books 
1. Murphy, K., Travers, P., Walport, M., & Janeway, C. (2012). Janeway’s Immunobiology. 
New York: Garland Science. 
2. Madigan, M.T.,  Martinko, J.M.,  Brock, Biology of Microorganisms, Prentice-Hall, Inc., 
2006, 11th  Edition. 
Online Course Material 
1 NPTEL Video Lectures on  Essentials in Immunology by Prof. R. Manjunath, Prof. 
Dipankar Nandi , Prof. Anjali Karande, Indian Institute of Science Bangalore  
(http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104108055/) 
2. NPTEL Video Lectures on Cellular and Molecular Immunology by Prof. Sachin Kumar, 
Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati  (http://nptel.ac.in/courses/102103038/)   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
152 
 
 
Title Flux Balance Analysis Number BBL7XX0 
Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P 
[C] 
3–0–0[3] 
Offered for M.Tech Type Elective  
Prerequisite Nil   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide an introduction to flux balance analysis (FBA), reactions,  metabolites, & pathways, 
mass balanced linear equations, biomass reaction, how to create a stoichiometric matrix from 
reactions and metabolites, gene-protein-reaction associations, constraint-based modeling. 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Implement knowledge of important concepts related to the FBA 
2. To apply them to model the behavior of biological systems as well as develop st rategies for 
manipulating them. 
Contents 
Flux Balance Analysis Overview: Overview, Formulation of Flux Balance Analysis [1 Lecture] 
Reactions, Metabolites, & Pathways:  Identifying Metabolic Reactions and Metabolites (Gene -
Protein-Reactions), Desired Reaction Information, Genome -scale Reconstruction Reactions, 
Desired Metabolite Information, Genome -scale Reconstruction Metabolites, Metabolic Pathway, 
System Boundaries:Exchange & Transport Reactions, Genome -scale Metabolic Reconstructions, 
Reconstruction Process: 96 Step Protocol, E.coli Core Model [14 Lectures] 
Mathematical Representation of Reactions & Constraints:  Creating A Stoichiometric Matrix, 
Genome-scale Metabolic Reconstruction [2 Lectures] 
Mass Balanced Linear Equations:  How can we use the Stoichiometric Matrix?, Dynamic Mass 
Balance, The Conceptual Basis of Constraint -based Modeling, Role of Constraints, Flux 
Optimization [6 Lectures] 
Biomass Reaction:  Biomass Precursors, E.coli Precursor Metabolites, Maintenance Energy 
Requirements, Biomass Reaction For E.coli Core Model, Biomass Objective Function, Formulation 
of Flux Balance Analysis, E.coli Core Model [8 Lectures] 
Calculating Fluxes:  Cobra Toolbox, Matlab, Drawing Flux Values on a Map, Print Flux Values, 
Examples [8 Lectures] 
Flux Balance Analysis Toolbox:  Methods in Constraint -based Reconstruction and Analysis [3 
Lectures] 
153 
 
 
Textbook 
1.Palsson B. O., (2006), Systems Biology: Properties of Reconstru cted Networks, cambridge 
Press. 
Self Learning Material 
1. Utah State University, https://systemsbiology.usu.edu/syllabus.php 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 
https://nptel.ac.in/noc/individual_course.php?id=noc18-bt22 
  
154 
 
Title Systems Biology in Personalized Genomics Number BBL7XX0 
Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P 
[C] 
3–0–0[3] 
Offered for M.Tech Type Elective  
Prerequisite Nil   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Illustrate “big-data” problems in personalized genomics by discussing recent publications 
2. Provide training in high dimensional biological data analysis 
3. Familiarize the participants with the use of statistical tools and principles for an alyzing 
genomic/epigenomic data 
Learning Outcomes 
It will enable participants to utilize th e methods presented in this course for analyzing biological 
data. The course introduces the current research challenges faced in the field of  computational 
systems biology. 
Contents 
Course Overview and Introduction:  Design Principles of Complex Systems, Introduction to 
Genomics and Systems Biology [2 lectures] 
Topological and Network Evolution Models:  Small-World and Scale -Free Networks, Duplication -
Divergence, Complex Models of Network Evolution, Network Properties of Biological Networks [6 
lectures] 
Types of Biological Networks:  Types of Biological Networks, Genes2Networks and Network 
Visualization, Sets2Networks - Creating Functional Association Networks, Genes2FANs - Analyzing 
Gene Lists with Functional Association Networks [4 lectures] 
Data Processing and Identifying Differentially Expressed Genes:  Data Normalization, Univariate 
and multivariate methods for identifying differentially expressed gene sets  - Part 1, Univariate 
methods (SAM, Welch‟s t -test, LIMMA,) - Part 2, Multivariate method (Principal Component 
Analysis; Gene Set Enrichment Analysis; Supervised and unsupervised machine learning for data 
classification, including Clustering, SVM and KNN) [15 lectures] 
Analytical Tools for Genomics:  Enrichment Analysis and Enrichr, GEO2Enrichr: A Google Chrome 
Extension for Gene Set Extraction and Enrichment, Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) - 
Preliminaries, Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA), Principal Angle Enrichment Analysis (PAEA), 
Network2Canvas (N2C) and E nrichment Analysis with N2C, Expression2Kinases: Inferring 
Pathways from Differentially Expressed Genes, DrugPairSeeker and the New CMAP, Classifying 
Patients/Tumors from TCGA [15lectures] 
 
155 
 
Textbook 
1.    Ma'ayan A. and MacArthur B. D. (eds.) (2012), New Frontiers of Network Analysis in Systems 
Biology, Springer. 
Reference Books 
Research literature 
Self learning materials 
1. Mount Sinai Center for Bioinformatics, https://www.coursera.org/learn/network-biology 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
156 
 
Title Artificial Intelligence in Bioengineering 
Lab 
Number BBP7XX0 
Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 0-0-2 [1] 
Offered for  Type Open 
Elective  
Prerequisite Machine Learning-1   
Objective: 
The instructor will: 
1. prepare industry relevant advanced cross -disciplinary skills in machine learning 
applications in bioengineering. 
Learning Outcome 
The students will have an ability to: 
1. comprehend fundamental concepts and hands-on techniques of the state -of-the-
art data science and deep learning methodologies 
2. apply popular unsupervised learning methods, including clustering methodologies 
and supervised methods such as deep neural networks 
3. master techniques in modern data an alysis to leverage big datasets from omics, 
image and sensors; use pyspark skillfully to analyze big data 
Laboratory Experiments 
Introduction: data types, big data processing using pyspark (3 labs) 
Machine learning applications : supervised and unsupervised  techniques for omics 
data integration and analysis (4 labs) 
Deep learning: applications in omics, image and sensor data (7 labs) 
Textbook 
1. Shalev-Shwartz,S., Ben-David,S., (2014), Understanding Machine Learning: From 
Theory to Algorithms, Cambridge University Press 
2. Tseng,G., Ghosh,D., Zhou X.J., (2015), Integrating Omics Data,  Cambridge 
University Press 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Department of Computer Science, Stanford University 
https://see.stanford.edu/Course/CS229 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. https://www.tutorialspoint.com/pyspark/ 
 
157 
 
Course Title Advances in Food Safety and Technology Course No. CYP6XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Sc. (CY) Program Type Compulsory  
Pre-requisite   
 
Objectives 
 
The instructor will: 
1. Provide in-depth exposure of raw materials composition, consumer foods and fodder. 
2. prepare the students to analyze and improve the quality of foods. 
3. give knowledge on bio-active compounds, chemical and biochemical reactions, health 
effects and properties of food.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will be able to: 
1. Understand properties and reactions of carbohydrates, lipids and proteins during 
storage and processing of food and how these influence the quality and properties of 
the food. 
2. Have knowledge on and be able to use food regulations. 
3.  
Course Content 
Introduction: general aspects of food industry, world food demand and Indian scenario, 
constituents of food, quality and nutritive aspects. Food additives, standards, deteriorative 
factors and their control, preliminary processing methods, conversion and preservation 
operation. (6 lectures) 
 
Energy Engineering in Food Processing - Generation of Steam, Fuel and Electric Power 
Utilization, Process Controls in Food Processing, Systems for Heating and Cooling Food 
Products. Thermal Properties of Foods, Modes of Heat Transfer - Freezing Systems, Frozen-
Food Properties, Freezing Time refrigeration system for food products. (6 lectures) 
 
Processing Systems: Microbial Survivor Curves, Influence of External Agents, Thermal 
Death Time, Spoilage Probability. Preservation by heat and cold dehydration, 
concentration, frying, irradiation, microwave heating, sterilization and pasteurization, 
fermentation and pickling, packing methods. (10 lectures) 
 
Separation processes in food processing- Electrodialysis Systems, Reverse Osmosis 
Membrane Systems, Membrane Performance, Ultrafiltration Membrane Systems, 
Concentration Polarization. Types of Reverse-Osmosis and Ultrafiltration Systems, Drying 
Processes, Dehydration Systems, Dehydration System Design,Sedimentation, 
Centrifugation, Mixing. (6 lectures) 
 
Production and utilization of food products - soft and alcoholic beverages, dairy products, 
meat, poultry and fish products, treatment and disposal of food processing wastes. (6 
lectures) 
 
Packaging-Introduction, Food Protection, Product Containment, Product Communication, 
Product Convenience, Mass Transfer in Packaging Materials. Innovations in Food Packaging, 
Food Packaging and Product Shelf-life, Food canning technology, fundamentals of food 
canning technology.Heat sterilization of canned food, containers - metal, glass and flexible 
packaging, Canning procedures for fruits, vegetables, meats, and poultry marine products. 
(6 lectures) 
 
 
158 
 
Textbooks: Fundamentals of Food Engineering by Stanley Charm. 
1. Introduction to Food Engineering - R. Paul Singh, Dennis R. 
2. Food microbiology: fundamentals and frontiers. 2nd ed. Washington (DC): 
American Society for Microbiology 
 
Reference Book:  
1. S. Damodaran, K.L. Parkin, and O. R. Fennema, Fennema‟s Food Chemistry, 
fourth edition, 2007, CRC Press 
2. Heldman, D.R., Food Process Engineering, The AVI Publishing Co; Westport, 1975 
 
Online Course Material 
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103107088/ 
2. https://swayam.gov.in/nd2_cec19_ag04/preview 
 
 
 