Source: http://intra.iitj.ac.in/acad_website/pg_curriculum/ELECTRICAL%20ENGINEERING_06092019.pdf
================================================================================

 
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur 
 
   
 
 
 
 
PG Course Booklet 
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur 
July 2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
A Proposal  
 
For 
 
 
M. Tech. And Dual Degree (M.Tech. and 
Ph.D.) in Cyber Physical Systems 
 
 
 
Program Structure 
 
 
 
 
  
M.Tech.&M.Tech.-Ph.D. Dual Degree Programs in 
Cyber Physical Systems 
Introduction 
Beginning in the first decade of 21 st century and continuing today, computational and 
communication resources, tightly integrated with physical systems, shaping the new capabilities for 
the modern systems. The use of computational resources to achieve different capabilities is in 
existence for several decades. However, many modern systems have high degree of complexities 
and also the scale of these systems is large and/or has distributed nature. For example traffic 
control system in a city requires modelling of traffic flows in different areas  and optimizing different 
performance objectives by appropriately taking routing decisions, and decisions about actuating 
different signals for smooth traffic flow; this is a large scale distributed system. There are several 
other domains where CPS example s can be seen e.g. Healthcare, Robotics, Automotive, Power 
Grid, Avionics and Transportation. Such system necessitates a deeper understanding of system 
behaviour and also provides feedback to augment system design to achieve overall objectives from 
the sys tem. Emergence of ubiquitous computing and communication has open enormous 
opportunities to provide new capabilities to systems e.g. robotics assisted remote surgery. Many 
(small) systems can work in collaborative/cooperative manner to achieve a larger ove rall objective. 
The examples can be seen in robotics and modern warfare where collaboration/cooperation 
achieves larger objectives. The communication capability also provides a possibility of distributed 
learning for systems.Hybrid system modelling is one of the possible approaches to model CPS. 
Hybrid system approach allows inclusion of both continuous time and discrete time states 
(variables) in the model.  
The seamless integration of cyber system with physical system also poses several challenges 
towards system security against possible system attacks. With modelling of physical system, it is 
necessary to model different possible attacks and to provide adequate security at hardware and 
software to ensure overall system security in all scenarios. The cyber  component includes hardware 
and associated software. The design of cyber component also requires software level abstraction to 
have system level model of cyber component. This also allows designing a very high reliability 
system as the model allows a pred ictable behaviour. Conventionally software is developed without 
formal models and largely depends on programmers‟ experience and knowledge; however, 
requirement of safety, reliability in CPS demand higher level of abstractions at software level as 
well. This allows the system remains correct and secure by design. 
Objective of the Programme 
The program aims to produce competent engineerswho can design engineered systems that are 
built from seamless integration of physical system and cyber systems. The progra m will enable 
engineers with required competency to design software -hardware architecture. The program also 
imparts knowledge of several tools for modelling physical systems and tools for designing cyber 
components. The program will produce professionals w ho can design predictable and secure Cyber 
Physical Systems (CPS).  
Expected Graduate Attributes (M.Tech) 
1. Ability to understand modern approaches to Model CPS. 
2. Appreciation of cross disciplinary interaction of cyber and Physical systems.  
3. Capability to design cyber components to meet the overall specifications of a unified system. 
4. Adequate design knowledge to ensure system remains correct by design. 
5. Ability to use knowledge from machine learning, control theory to achieve overall objectives 
of a given CPSs.   
6. High quality technical communication skills. 
7. Appreciation and adherence to norms of professional ethics. 
8. Ability to plan and manage technical projects. 
 
 
Learning outcome: 
1. Ability to analyse overall specifications of CPS and translate it to the different sub -
systems design requirements.  
2. Adequate competency to model overall CPS using Hybrid system and other approaches 
and validate the model.  
3. Capability toco-design hardware-software architecture in distributed environment. 
4. Knowledge of Machine Learning algorithms and Distributed Control algorithms.  
5. Methods to embedded security in overall design of CPS. 
6. Ability to understand applications like smart grid, mobile networks and d ifferent systems 
of smart city.  
7. Critical thinking and scientific problem solving.  
8. Skill to communicate scientific ideas and /or application systems.  
9. Acquire basic project management skills 
 
Topics Cloud for the CPS program 
 Modelling of CPS system from Hybrid system‟s perspectives 
 Distributed computing; FoG and Cloud computing 
 Embedded System design (Using programmable system-on-chip approach) 
 Real time operating system 
 Communication protocols 
 Networked and distributed Control system  
 Algorithms of Machine Learning 
 Digital Signal Processing 
  
Proposed Program’s Structure Overall Structure 
Category Program 
Core (MC) 
Program 
Elective (ME) 
Open 
Elective 
(MO) 
Project  
(MP) 
Total 
Graded 
Credits 
Total 
Graded + 
Nongraded 
Credits 
Credits 18 18 06 16 58 62 
 
Semester wise distribution of credits 
Cat
. 
Course Title L-T-P Credi
ts 
 Cat
. 
Course Title L-
T-P 
Credi
ts 
I Semester  II Semester 
MC Introduction to Cyber 
Physical Systems 
3-0-0 3  MC Security in  CPS 2-0-
0 
2 
MC Cyber Physical System 
Modelling  and Simulation 
Laboratory 
0-0-2 1  MC Data Communication and 
Networking 
3-0-
0 
3 
 MC Advanced Control System 3-0-
0 
3 
MC  Introduction to Modelling 
(Fractal offered by Dept. Of 
Mathematics) 
1-0-0 1  MC Embedded System Design 3-0-
0 
3 
MC Simulation of Dynamical  
Systems  
1-0-0 1  ME Program Elective-3 3-0-
0 
3 
ME Program Elective-1 3-0-0 3  MC Embedded System Design 
Laboratory 
0-0-
2 
1 
ME Program Elective-2 3-0-0 3 
MO Open Elective-1 3-0-0 3 
NG Technical Communication 1-0-0 1  NG Innovation and IP 
Management  
1-0-
0 
1 
Total(Graded+Non-graded) 16  Total(Graded+Non-graded) 16 
 
III Semester  IV Semester 
MP Project-1  6  MP Project-2  10 
ME Program Elective-4 3-0-0 3  MO Open Elective- 2 3-0-
0 
3 
ME Program Elective-5 3-0-0 3  NG Professional Ethics 1-0-
0 
1 
ME Program Elective-6 3-0-0 3      
NG Systems Engineering and 
Project Management 
  1-0-
0 
     1      
Total(Graded+Non-graded) 16  Total(Graded+Non-graded) 14 
 
List of Program Electives 
Course Title L-T-P Credit
s 
Department offers 
the course 
Computer Vision 3-0-0 3 CSE 
Advanced Digital Signal Processing 3-0-0 3 EE 
Vehicular Ad-Hoc 
Networks(VANETs) 
3-0-0 3 CSE 
Edge & Fog Computing 3-0-0 3 CSE 
Robotics : Fractal 1 Robot Modelling 1-0-2 2 ME 
Robotics : Fractal 2 Control 1-0-0 1 ME 
Robotics : Fractal 3  Motion 
Planning and Programming  
1-0-0 1 ME 
Machine Learning I 3-0-0 3 CSE 
Digital and Systems-on-Chips 
Design 
3-0-0 3 EE 
Introduction to Virtual Reality 3-0-0 3 CSE 
Smart Grid 3-0-0 3 EE 
Adaptive Signal processing 3-0-0 3 EE 
Computer Architecture 3-0-0 3 CSE 
Digital Twin 3-0-0 3 EE 
Machine Leaning II 3-0-0 3 CSE 
Artificial Intelligence I 3-0-0 3 CSE 
Artificial Intelligence II 3-0-0 3 CSE 
Smart Manufacturing  1-0-2 2 ME 
Resource Constrained AI 3-0-0 3 CSE 
Real Time Communications 3-0-0 3 EE 
Industry 4.0 Applications in  
Manufacturing Systems 
1-0-0 1 ME 
Optimization 1-0-0 1 Mathematics 
 
The department may add new electives from time to time.  
 
 
Title Introduction to Cyber Physical Systems Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. Cyber Physical Systems Type Core 
Prerequisite Differential Equations, Basics of Microprocessors   
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. introduce modeling of CPS 
2. introduce ability to analyze and simulate CPS systems    
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. apply modeling and associated tools for Hybrid system  
2. to analyze CPS by with holistic models of cyber and physical components. 
 
Contents  
Motivation and examples of CPS e.g. Energy, Medical and Transportation cyber physical 
systems; Key design drivers and quality attributes of CPS. Attributes of high confidence CPS; (8 
hours) 
 
Continuous systemsmodeling; Discrete time system modeli ng; Finite state machine; Extended 
state machines; Hybrid system modeling; Classes of Hybrid Systems. (17 Hours) 
 
Analysis and Verification: 
Basic concepts of embedded systems; Embedded Processors; Input -outputs; Invariants and 
Temporal Logic; Linear Tempo ral Logic; Equivalence and Refinement; Development of models 
from specifications; Rechability analysis and Model Checking (17 Hours) 
 
Text Books  
1. R. Rajkumar, D. de. Niz and M. Klein, (2017), Cyber Physical Systems, Addision-Wesely. 
2. E.A.Lee and S A Shesia, (2018),Embedded system Design: A Cyber-Physical Approach, 
Second Edition, MIT Press. 
3. A.Platzer, (2017),Logical Foundations of Cyber Physical Systems, Springer. 
 
PreparatoryCourse Material 
Basics of Differential equations and basics of Microprocessors from any standard textbook.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Title Embedded System Design Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. Cyber Physical Systems Type Core 
Prerequisite Basics of Microprocessors   
 
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. introduce concepts of different architectures and programming languages of embedded 
processors.  
2. introduce design of embedded systems.   
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. program and to design embedded system using 32 -bit embedded processors based on 
system specifications.  
2. use different IDE and debugging tools.    
 
Contents  
Review of Embedded Computing; embedded system design process; CPS and embedded 
Computing (3 Hours) 
 
Architecture of ARM Cortex M3 and Cortex A series processors; Memory system mechanism; 
Cache; Memory management units and address translation; Performance a ssessment of 
embedded processor; Introduction to Embedded Multicore Architecture 
(16 Hours) 
 
Programming of Embedded processors using assembly and C; models for program --data flow 
graphs; Assembly language programming of ARM Cortex M3; Hardware software c o-design; 
(13 Hours) 
 
Processes and real time operating systems; Multi -rate system; real time scheduling algorithms 
e.g. RMA,EDF and their variants; Energy efficient scheduling algorithms; Examples of design of 
embedded systems.  (8 Hours) 
 
Text Books  
 
1. JoshephYiu, (2013), The definitive Guide to ARM Cortex M3 and M4 Processors, 3rd  Edition, 
Elsevier.  
2. Marilyn Wolf, (2014), High Performance embedded Computing: Applications in Cyber 
Physical Systems and Mobile Computing, 2nd Edition, Elsevier.    
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Prof. Santanu Chaudhary,Introduction to Embedded Computing, NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108102045/# 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. Marilyn Wolf, Computers as Components: Principles of Embedded Computing System 
Design, Third Edition, Elsevier 2012.  
 
Title Advanced Control  Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. Cyber Physical Systems Type Core 
Prerequisite Differential equations and Basics of Control system 
desirable 
  
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. introduce Multi-Agent based Modeling control algorithms 
2. introduce robust controller for distributed systems  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. evaluate different controllers for a given distributed system. 
2. use different tools to design robust controllers 
  
 
Contents  
Review of state space analysis and feedback control design; Problem of estimation and 
observer design; Cooperative control motivation and examples. (7 Hours) 
 
Distributed Control: Sources of uncertainty and robust control; Concepts  of Sliding Mode 
control and its applications to Robust control design for distributed systems; Robust observer 
design. (14 Hours) 
 
Design behaviour of swarms Consensus problem and distributed flocking behaviour; Stability 
analysis of flocking motion; (8 Hours) 
 
Event Triggered Control: Introduction to event based sampling; stability with event based 
sampling; event based multi agent systems; consensus with event triggered control (7 Hours)  
 
Control of Cyber physical systems: Control of CPS with logic speci fications, symbolic models for 
nonlinear system and extension to large classes of systems. (6 Hours)    
 
Textbooks 
1. Jeff Shamma, Cooperative Control of Distributed Multi-agent Systems, Wiley, 2008 
2. Edwards, Christopher, and Sarah Spurgeon, Sliding mode control: theory and applications , 
CRC Press, 1998. 
 
Other references: 
1. Tabuada, Paulo. "Event-triggered real-time scheduling of stabilizing control 
tasks." IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 52.9 (2007): 1680-1685. 
 
PreparatoryCourse Material 
Basics of Control System from Norman Nice, 2007. 
 
 
 
 
Title Simulation of Dynamical Systems Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 
Offered for M.Tech. Cyber Physical System Type Core  
Prerequisite Basics of ODE   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce different techniques to simulate different class of systems.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Use different tools for simulating systems using right set of simulation parameters  
Contents  
Simulation as problem solving tool; Basic principles of numeric integration; Euler integration; 
difference equation simulation (3 hours) 
Runge–Kutta Algorithms; stability domains of  Runge –Kutta Algorithms; extrapolation 
technique; solver for Differential Algebraic Equations; (4 hours) 
Random variables; probability distribution; poison process; Markov process; Markov chain, 
Bayesian statistics; simulated annealing; Monte-Carlo simulation (7 hours) 
Textbooks 
1. François E. Cellier  and Ernesto Kofman (2006), Continuous Systems Simulation , 
Springer 2006 
 
2. Sheldon M. Ross (2013), Simulation, Academic Press, 5th Edition.  
Title Cyber Physical System Modelling Laboratory Number EEP7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 0–0–2 [1] 
Offered for M.TechCyber Physical System Type Core 
Prerequisite ODE   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce techniques to model/simulate different Cyber Physical Systems 
2. Introduce techniques to verify different CPS models 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Use different tools for Modelling/Simulation and verifications.  
 
Contents 
Modelling experiments in continuous, discrete and hybrid system; Verification of mo del using 
different techniques; Sensitivity analysis of Models; Sensitivity analysis of Hybrid Models; 
Scheduling in embedded system 
 
  
Title  Embedded System Design Laboratory  Number EEP7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 0–0–2 [1] 
Offered for M.Tech.Cyber Physical System Type Core 
Prerequisite Basics of Processors   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Design experimentations to ensure students get practical exposure for embedded system 
design tools.  
2. Introduce students overall design process of embedded systems using Integrated 
Development Environment (IDE).  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. 1. Use assembly and high level languages to program 32-bit processors 
2. Design interfacing circuits for embedded processors 
 
Contents 
Programming Cortex M3 processors using assembly and C language; Interfacing the processors 
with LCD, Seven Segment; DC Motor; Key board etc.; use of serial communication with 
processors; Interfacing sensors through ADC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Title Smart Grid  Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. Cyber Physical System Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Concepts and topics that are relevant to smart grid technologies to facilitate exploring 
    research opportunities.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand main concepts of smart grid development and the critical technologies tha t 
underpin such development, their basic principles, physical constraints, and technological 
potentials 
 
Contents  
Smart Grid Basics: Evolution of Electric Power Grid and Smart Grid, Objectives, main features 
and challenges of smart grid (5 Hours) 
 
Energy resources : centralized vs. distributed generation; renewable energy: solar, wind, 
hydropower,biomass, geothermal, ocean wave; benefit, costs, and policies of renewable 
energy; renewable sourcesintegration – overcoming intermittence; storage systems technology 
(10 Hours) 
 
Plug-in Electric Vehicle(PEV): history of EV; PEV challenges and potential solutions; EV and 
electric power grid; PEV charging infrastructure, challenges and solutions; PEV as an energy 
storage device and an energy source (V2G). (9 Hours) 
 
Demand-side management: load profile of the power grid; market pricing; peak shaving and 
valley filling; load forecasting; regulations and policies. (9 Hours) 
 
Monitoring and Protection: wide -area monitoring system (WAMS), SCADA and PMU; advanced 
metering infrastructure (AMI); smart metering; communication infrastructure and technologies 
(9 Hours) 
 
Textbooks  
1. J. Duncan Glover, Mulukutla S. Sarma, and Thomas J. Overbye, (2008),Power System 
Analysis and Design, 4th Ed.,Stamford, CT: Cengage Learning,. 
2. Jan Machowski, JanuszBialek, and James R. Bumby, (2008),Power Systems Dynamics, 
Stability and Control, 2nd Ed.New York, New York: John Wiley. 
3. B. Droste-Franke, et al.,(2012), Balancing Renewable Electricity – energy storage, demand 
side management, and network extension from an interdisciplinary perspective. Heidelberg, 
Germany: Springer. 
4. T. Ackermann, Ed.,(2005),Wind Power in Power Systems. New York, New York: Wiley.  
 
 
Title Security in Cyber Physical Systems Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 
Offered for M.Tech. Cyber Physical System Type Core 
Prerequisite Basics of Control system is desirable   
 
Objectives 
 
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce mathematical framework for Cyber Physical System attacks  
2. Introduce centralized and decentralized techniques of attack detection  
 
Learning Outcomes  
 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Analyze the system for possible security vulnerability.   
2. Design attack resilient system.    
  
 
Contents  
Review of  graph theory based models; some examples from infrastructure system modelling; 
Descriptor system; Unified modelling of CPS attack; case of undetectable attacks; (7 Hours)  
 
Graph theoretic characterization of attacks and its limitations; Centralized and distributed 
monitors; examples from power system, water distribution networks etc. (7 Hours)   
 
Security issues of Industrial Control Systems; Integrity attacks on SCADA systems; Model 
based technique to detect integrity attacks on sensors; threat model and its effect on contro l 
scheme; countermeasure for detecting such attacks; watermarking scheme;  (7 Hours)  
 
Design of observers under sensor and actuator attacks; design of observer for distributed 
environment under different attacks; applications of swarms of UAVs; Control des ign with 
denial service attack; case studies (6 Hours) 
 
 
 References 
1. F. Pasqualetti, F. Dörfler and F. Bullo, "Attack Detection and Identification in Cyber -Physical 
Systems," in IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control , vol. 58, no. 11, pp. 2715 -2729, Nov. 
2013. 
2. H. Fawzi, P. Tabuada and S. Diggavi, "Secure Estimation and Control for Cyber -Physical 
Systems Under Adversarial Attacks," in  IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control , vol. 59, no. 
6, pp. 1454-1467, June 2014. 
3. Yilin Mo, Rohan Chabukswar and Bruno Sinop oli“Detecting Integrity Attacks on SCADA 
Systems” in IEEE Transactions on Control System Technology, Vol. 22, No. 4, 2014 
4. F. Pasqualetti, F. Dörfler and F. Bullo  “Control Theoretic methods for Cyber Physical 
Security”, in IEEE Control System Magazine, pp. 110-127, Feb. 2015 
 
PreparatoryCourse Material 
Basics of Control System from Norman Nice, 2007.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Proposal  
 
For 
 
 
 
M. Tech. in Sensors and Internet of Things 
(SIoT) 
 
 
 
Program Structure for first four semesters 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 
Last few decades had seen extensive growth in the electronic systems to make the life of 
humans smoother and easier with time. With enormous features available in various systems, a 
new era of engineering, Internet of Things (IoT), has gained interest. IoT is a network of connected 
things and people, which collects and communicates data from environment around them. To be 
able to do so, Sensors are the key components to communicate with surroundings. Applications of 
Sensors and Inte rnet of Things ( SIoT) include smart agriculture, transportation, environment 
monitoring, healthcare, and smart wearable. The M.Tech. Program in sIoT is especially designed for 
young innovators to provide them a breadth as well as depth for designing system s for the current 
era of sIoT. M.Tech.+Ph.D. Dual Degree program will have same course work as M.Tech. sIoT for 
first two years. However, Dual Degree program is specially designed to encourage talented and 
motivated B.Tech./M.Sc. students to undertake direct Ph.D. study in the area of sIoT. 
 
Objective 
To produce skilled graduates with exposure to current era of SIoT and deeper understanding 
of the subject components. The graduates will eventually be contributing to variety of domains 
including smart agricul ture, transportation, environment monitoring, healthcare, and smart 
wearable. 
 
Program’s Scope 
The objective is to develop broad IoT systems and this program will be offered with four Primary 
verticals. 
 Sensors and Sensing Technologies 
 Circuits and Systems 
 Communication and Networking 
 Embedded systems 
The program will offer deeper theoretical learning through various verticals by theory and 
laboratory courses. Hands on experiments and projects will be offered to enhance the learning. For 
Dual Degree Ph.D., ~2 additional years will be dedicated towards research contributions. 
 
Graduate attributes 
 Ability to follow multidisciplinary approach for design and implementation of systems, 
involving various domains of Engineering, Sciences, and Humanities. 
 Skills to design and develop various sensors and related interfacing circuitry for IoT 
 Ability to develop design, simulation, and implementation schemes based on the knowledge 
acquired from coursework. 
 Skills to implement IoT sensor platforms for applications in the  area of environment, health, 
agriculture, and other novel applications. 
 Skills to undertake high quality academic and industrial research in Sensors and IoT 
Learning outcomes 
 Strong understanding of fundamentals of Sensing and Sensor Devices  
 Ability of designing Digital and Analog interface circuits used for SIoT 
 Capability of interfacing Sensors for IoT applications 
 Development and use of emerging Sensors for IoT Technology 
 Understanding of fundamentals of wireless communications to design Sensor Nodes 
 Implementation of IoT platforms using embedded systems 
 Understanding of uses and risks related to IoT devices 
  
Program’s Structure 
Overall Structure 
Category M.Tech 
Compulsory 
(MC) 
M. Tech Elective 
(ME) 
M. Tech Open 
(MO) 
M. Tech 
Project (MP) 
Total 
Credits 19 17 6 16 58 
 
Semester wise distribution of credits 
Cat
. 
Course Title L-T-P Cr.  Cat
. 
Course Title L-T-P Cr. 
I Semester  II Semester 
MC Sensors and 
Measurement 
3-0-0 3  MC Data communication and 
Networking 
3-0-
0 
3 
MC Microsystems Fabrication 
Technology 
3-0-0 3  MC Digital and Systems-on-
Chip Design 
3-0-
0 
3 
MC Analog and Interfacing 
Circuits 
3-0-0 3  MC VLSI Design Lab 0-0-
2 
1 
MC Introduction to Internet 
of Things 
1-0-0 1  ME Program Elective-2 3-0-
0 
3 
MC Sensors and IoT Lab 0-0-2 1  ME Program Elective-3 3-0-
0 
3 
ME Program Elective-1 3-0-0 3  ME Program Elective-4 3-0-
0 
3 
NG Technical Communication 1-0-0 1  NG Innovation and IP 
Management  
1-0-
0 
1 
Total (Graded + Non-graded) 15  Total (Graded + Non-graded) 17 
Winter Term       
MC Winter Internship 1      
Total 1    
   
III Semester  IV Semester 
MP Project-1  5  MP Project-2  11 
ME Program Elective-5 3-0-0 3  MO Open Elective-2 3-0-
0 
3 
ME Program Elective-6 2-0-0 2  NG Professional Ethics 1-0-
0 
1 
MO Open Elective-1 3-0-0 3      
NG Systems Engineering and 
Project Management 
1-0-0 1      
Total (Graded+ Non-graded) 14  Total (Graded+ Non-graded)l 15 
 
Winter Internship is designed for hands-on-exposure in micro-fabrication 
technology for sensors and actuators 
List of Program Electives 
Course Title L-T-
P 
Cre
dits 
 Course Title L-T-P Cre
dits 
First/Third Semester  Third Semester 
Flexible and Printed Electronics 3-0-0 3  Advanced Digital Signal 
Processing 
3-0-0 3 
Digital VLSI  Design 3-0-0 3  Neuromorphic Computing and 
Design 
3-0-0 3 
Wireless Communication 3-0-0 3  Fog and Edge Computing 3-0-0 3 
Antenna Engineering 3-0-0 3  Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks 3-0-0 3 
    Machine Learning 1 3-0-0 3 
    Selected Topics in Sensors & 
IoT I 
1-0-0 1 
 
Second Semester  Fourth Semester 
Image Sensor Design and 
Applications 
3-0-0 3  Resource Constrained AI 3-0-0 3 
RF IC Design 3-0-0 3  Microfluidics Technology 3-0-0 3 
Embedded Systems Design 3-0-0 3  Selected Topics in Sensors & 
IoT II 
2-0-0 2 
Active Filter Design 3-0-0 3  Selected Topics in Sensors & 
IoT III 
3-0-0 3 
Millimeter-wave Technology 3-0-0 3     
Nano Sensors 3-0-0 3     
Open electives: These can be taken from the existing program electives or any other course of 
same level from the institute 
  
Course Title Sensors and Measurements Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M. Tech. 1st year Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite Semiconductor Devices    
Objective 
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce the students to sensors, as transducers from physical parameters to signals 
2. Explain the sensing principles for displacement, force, pressure, acceleration, 
temperature, optical radiation, nuclear radiation 
3. Explain the sensor range, sensitivity, accuracy, repeatability, noise 
 
Learning Outcomes 
Students are expected to have the ability to 
1. Understand fundamental principles of sensing technology,  
2. Design various sensors and implementation 
3. Understand Nondestructive characterization methods 
 
Contents 
EEL7XX1: Sensor characteristics [1-0-0] 
(Fractal 1 )Definitions, terminology, classification, Static vs dynamic properties of transducers, 
Transfer functions, Ideal and realistic transducer models, Resolution, linearization, dynamic 
range, detection threshold, Selectivity & sensitivity, Calibration, Errors of the experimental 
measurements, Noise: electronics, environmental & internal (14 lectures)  
EEL7XX2: Physical Principle of Sensing [1-0-0] 
(Fractal 2)Capacitance, Magnetism, Induction, Resistance, Piezoelectric effect, Pyroelectric effect, 
Hall effect, Thermoelectric effect, Temperature and thermal properties of materials and heat 
transfer, Optics, Fiber optics and waveguides (14 lectures) 
 
EEL7XX3: Sensor Interface and Applications [1-0-0] 
(Fractal 3) Input characteristi cs of interface circuits, Amplifiers, Light to voltage converters, 
Capacitance to voltage converters, Bridge Circuits, Excitation circuits . Case Studies: Inertial 
Sensors (Accelerometer & gyroscope), Healthcare Sensors (Glucometer, ECG & MRI), Smart 
building Sensors (Smoke & occupancy sensors) (14 lectures) 
Text Books 
1. Jacob Fraden, (2010), Handbook of Modern Sensors, 5th Edition, Springer. 
2. J. W. Gardner, (1996), Microsensors, Principles and Applications, 1st Edition, Wiley. 
3. S. M. Sze, (1994), Semiconductor Sensors, 1st Edition, Wiley. 
 
  
Course Title  Analog and Interfacing 
Circuits 
Number EEL7XX0 
 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M. Tech. 1st year Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite Digital and Analog Electronics    
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Familiarize students with the concepts of Analog IC Design and give them a 
comprehensive overview of various amplifiers. 
2. Familiarize the students with different building blocks of a mixed signal interface circuit 
design essential for sensors and IoT. 
Learning Outcomes 
Students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand fundamental principles of CMOS Analog IC Design and interfacing of analog 
signals with the digital signal processing circuits. 
2. Apply the circuit design fundamentals for IoT applications. 
3. Work on design tools like Cadence/Mentor Graphics 
Contents 
EEL7XX1: Fundamentals of Analog Circuits and Design [1-0-0] 
(Fractal 1)Introduction toAnalog VLSI and design issues in CMOS technologies, MOS models, 
SPICE Models, Single stage amplifiers, Biasing circuits, Voltage and Current reference 
circuits, Feedback analysis, Multistage amplifiers, Mismatch and noise analysis, Differential 
amplifiers, Oscillators (14 Lectures) 
EEL7XX2: Readout Electronics [1-0-0] 
(Fractal 2)Switch capacitor circuits: Principles and applications in filter design; switches and 
related design issues, variable gain amplifier, low noise and high speed amplifier topologies . 
Analog to digital converters: Types of ADCs, static and dynamic charact eristics; track and 
hold, and sample and hold circuits; comparators; detail design analysis for successive 
approximation register (SAR) ADCs, discrete -time and continuous time sigma -delta ADCs(14 
Lectures) 
EEL7XX3: Digital to Analog Converters Design [1-0-0] 
(Fractal 3 )Digital to Analog Converters: Voltage-based DACs; charge -based DACs; current -
based DACs – binary and thermometer currents . Phase-locked loop: Basics; PLL dynamics; 
voltage controlled oscillator, frequency synthesis . Applications: Wearable Biomedical IoT 
nodes (14 Lectures) 
Text Books 
1. Razavi, B., (2016),Design of Analog CMOS Integrated Circuits , 2nd Edition, McGraw-Hill 
Education. 
2. R. Jacob Baker, H.W.Li, and D.E. Boyce, (2009), – CMOS Circuit Design ,Layout and 
Simulation, 2nd Edition, Prentice-Hall of India 
3. David A. Johns, Ken Martin, (2013), “Analog Integrated Circuit Design”, 2 nd Edition, John 
Wiley and Sons. 
 
 
Self Learning material 
1. Shanthi Pavan, VLSI Data Conversion Circuits , NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras , 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117106034/ 
2. Nagendra Krishnapura, Analog Integrated Circuit Design, Department of Electrical 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117106030/ 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. P. E. Allen, D. R. Holberg  (2013), CMOS Analog Circuit Design , 3rd Edition , Oxford 
University Press. 
2. R. Gregorian, G. C. Temes,  (2008), “Analog MOS Integrated Circuits for Signal 
Processing”, John Wiley and Sons. 
  
Course Title Microsystems Fabrication 
Technology 
Number EEL7XX0 
 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M. Tech. 1st year Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite Semiconductor Devices    
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce to the students the essentials of micro -electronics fabrication technology required for 
the realization of integrated circuits and transducers & actuators. 
2. I ntroduce the basic concepts of MEMS design, fabrication process integration and advanced 
micro-machining techniques for high aspect ratio MEMS structures.   
Learning Outcomes 
Students will have the capability to : 
1. Understand the unit fabrication processes for ICs and MEMS 
2. Design and fabricate MEMS based sensors and actuators  
 
Contents 
Unit processes in fabrication of ICs and MEMS: Clean room practices, Crystal growth techniques, 
wafer preparation and shaping, chemi cal cleaning, thermal oxidation, diffusion, ion implantation, 
photolithography, Thin film deposition, Etching (18 lectures) 
Unit processes specific to MEMS: Surface and bulk micro -machining, DRIE, LIGA, and packaging  
(12 lectures) 
Case studies of MEMS : Basic concepts of Beam/diaphragm mechanics, electrostatic actuation and 
fabrication, „process design‟ for selected MEMS based sensors and actuators such as Comb drives, 
touch sensor, pressure sensor, RF MEMS Switches, Electric / Magnetic Field sensor etc.   
(12 lectures ) 
Text books: 
1. Tai-Ran Hsu, (2017),  MEMS & Microsystems Design and Manufacture , Indian Edition, Tata 
McGraw-Hill 
2. M. Bao, (2005), Analysis and Design Principles of MEMS Devices, 1st Edition, Elsevier 
3. J. D. Plummer, M. D. Deal, and P. B. Griff in (2009), Silicon VLSI technology: Fundamentals, 
practice, and modelling, 1st Edition, Prentice Hall 
 
Self learning material 
1. Marc J. Madou, (2011), Fundamentals of Microfabrication and Nanotechnology : The Science 
of Miniaturization, 3rd Edition, CRC Press. 
2. M. Sze, (2003),VLSI Technology, 2nd edition McGraw Hill Education. 
 
Preparatory course material 
1. Sensors and Actuators (Elsevier) 
2. J. Micromechanics and Micro engineering  (IOP) 
 
  
Title Introduction to Internet of Things Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 
Offered for M. Tech. 1st year Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide overview of applications of IoT and relevant technologies 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Identify and integrate different components required for IoT applications 
 
Contents  
Introduction to IoT: Sensing, Actuation, Basics of IoT Networking (2 Lectures) 
IoT Architecture, Communication Protocols for IoT (2 Lectures) 
Sensor Networks: Wireless Sensor Network, Sensor nodes (2 Lectures) 
Machine to machine Communication: Introduction, Node types and M2M Applications, 
Integration of Sensors and Actuators for Implementation of IoT (4 Lectures) 
Introduction to Cloud, Fog, and Edge Computing, Smart cities and Smart homes, Industrial IoT 
(4 Lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Kamal, R., (2017) , Internet of Things - Architecture and Design Principles , 1st Edition, 
Mcgraw Hill. 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. Misra, S., Introduction to Internet of Things , NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Computer Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106105166/ 
 
  
Title Data Communication and Networking Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M. Tech. 1st year Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Fundamentals of Wireless Communications   
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1.  Expose the students to distinguishing features of wireless networks 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Design and optimize wireless network architectures. 
2. Implement security techniques for wireless networks. 
 
Contents  
Fundamentals: Layered architecture overview, data communication techniques , 
motivations for cross -layer protocol design, m otivations for performance analysis, 
forward error correction and re-transmission performances (7 Lectures) 
Network layer and topology  design: Markov and semi -Markov processes, Little‟s 
theorem, M/M/m/k, M/G/1 systems, priority queueing, network of qu eues, network 
traffic behavior, routing algorithms and analysis , distributed networks, design 
constraints, bounded latency networks, optimization, cognitive networks (10 Lectures) 
Network Management:Power management, time synchronization, localization, energy -
efficient protocols for sensor networks (7 Lectures) 
Mechanisms to improve performance : Self-Organizing Netwo rk, Software -Defined 
Networking (7 Lectures) 
Transport and Application Layers: congestion control and quality of service, scheduling , 
multimedia, key aspects and design issues (7 Lectures) 
Reliability and  security: Security requirement and attacks, Encryption techniques, 
reliable and secure communication protocols (4 Lectures) 
 
Textbook 
1. Dargie, W., and Poellabauer, C., (2010), Fundamentals 
ofWireless Sensor Networks: Theory and Practice, Wiley 
2. Stallings, W., (2007), Data and Computer Communications, 8th Edition, Pearson 
3. Bertsekas, D. P. and Gallager, R. G., (1992), Data Networks, 2nd Edition, Prentice 
Hall  
 
 
Self-Learning Material 
1. Mishra, S., Wireless Adhoc and Sensors Networks , NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Electrical and Electronics Communication Engineering, Indian 
Institute of Technology Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106105160/ 
2. Zou, Y., Zhu, J., Wang, X., and Hanzo, L., "A Survey on Wireless Security: Technical 
Challenges, Recent Advances, and Future Trends," in Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 
104, no. 9, pp. 1727-1765, Sept. 2016. 
3. W. Xia, Y. Wen, C. H. Foh, D. Niyato and H. Xie, "A Survey on Software -Defined 
Networking," in IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 27-51, 
Firstquarter 2015. 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. Zheng, L., Principles of Wireless Communications, MIT OpenCourseWare, Electrical 
Engineering & Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-452-
principles-of-wireless-communications-spring-2006/index.htm 
 
  
Course Title Digital and Systems-on-Chip 
Design 
Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M. Tech. 1st year Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite Digital Logic and Design    
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Make the students analyze the functional and nonfunctional performance of the 
system early in the design process to support design decisions.  
2. Make the students appreciate issues in system -on-a-chip design associated with co -
design, such as intellectual property, reuse, and verification. 
3. Explain the hardware, software, and interface synthesis.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to:  
1. Analyze hardware/software tradeoffs, algorithms, and architectures to optimize the 
system based on requirements and implementation constraints.  
2. Understand issues in interface design.  
3. Use co-simulation to validate system functionality.  
 
Contents  
Digital Design using Verilog and VHDL: Introduction to ASIC design, combinational and 
sequential circuit design process, Finite state machines, Modelling styles, RTL models, 
Memory models. Programmable logic devices and FPGAs: PALs, PLDs, FPGA programming 
concepts and techniques, design synthesis using FPGA kits (14 lectures) 
System-level and SoC d esign methodologies and tools; HW/SW co -design: analysis, 
partitioning, real -time scheduling, hardware acceleration; Virtual platform models, co -
simulation and FPGAs for prototyping of HW/SW systems; Transaction-Level Modeling (TLM), 
Electronic System-Level (ESL) languages: SystemC; High -Level Synthesis (HLS): allocation, 
scheduling, binding, resource sharing, pipelining; SoC and IP integration, verification and 
test. ARM-based System-on-Chip Design. (28 lectures) 
Text Books 
1. Unsalan, C., Tar, B., (2017), Digital System Design with FPGA Implementation Using 
Verilog and VHDL, McGraw-Hill 
2. D. Black, J. Donovan, (2010),SystemC: From the Ground Up, 2nd Edition, Springer. 
3. D. Gajski, S. Abdi, A. Gerstlauer, G. Schirner, (2009), Embedded System Design: 
Modeling, Synthesis, Verification, Springer 
 
Preparatory Course material 
1. Nelson, V.P., Carroll, B.D., Nagle, H.T., Irwin, J.D., (2020), Digital Logic Circuit 
Analysis and Design, 2nd Edition, Pearson 
2. G. De Micheli, (2017), Synthesis and Optimization of Digital Circuits, McGraw-Hill. 
 
Title Flexible and Printed Electronics Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. IV, M.Tech., Ph.D Type Elective 
Prerequisite Understanding of Electronic Materials and  
Devices 
  
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Explainfundamentalsof thin-film electronic materials and devices for flexible 
electronics. 
2.  Teach  the concepts for heterogeneous integration of thin -film devices on flexible 
platforms. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Identify the advantages, drawbacks, performances, complementarity and 
uniqueness of large area manufacturing vs. silicon technology 
2.  Integrate the operation principles, architectures and processing of main devices and 
systems fabricated for flexible electronics 
3. Predict systems integration issues and propose methods for integration and 
encapsulation of printed devices and systems 
 
Contents  
Introduction to Flexible and Printed Electronics: Evolution of Flexible Electronics, review 
of cutting edge research on electronics that can be flexible, plastic, stretchable, 
conformable or printed. Electro nic materials, components and systems, applications for 
IoT (2 Lectures) 
 
Materials, Processing, and Manufacturing : Various semiconductors, dielectric, and 
conducting materials, Organic semiconductors, from chemical bonds to bands, Charge 
injection and transport, Examples of printable functional materials , Thin-film Deposition 
and Processing Methods for Flexible Devices, Solution-based Patterning Processes; Ink-
jet printing, gravure and other processes , surface energy effects, multilayer pattern ing 
(12 Lectures) 
 
FlexibleThin-Film Transistors and Circuits: Thin -Film Transistor; D evice structure and 
performance, Electrical characteristics, parameter extraction, characterization methods  
for rigid and flexible devices, electrical stability, printed transistors; organic/polymer, 
metal-oxide, electrolyte gated, Case studies; submicrometer OTFTs and gravure printed 
OTFTs, From transistors to circui ts, circuits on flexi ble and non - silicon su bstrates, 
Contacts and Interfaces to Organic and Inorganic Electronic Devices: Schottky contacts, 
defects, carrier recombination, effect of applied mechanical strain(14 Lectures) 
 
Other Flexible Devices and System Integration : Organic Light Emitting Diodes , Organic 
Solar Cells, thin flexible OLED displays, OLED lighting, smart wallpaper, sensors, lo gic, 
and memory, RFID tags, L atest appli cations of printed electronics, Encapsulation, Roll 
to roll printing processes, Integration Issues, and Designs for Future (14 Lectures) 
 
Textbook 
1. G. Nisato, D. Lupo, S. Ganz (Ed itors) (2016), Organic and Printed Electronics: 
Fundamentals and Applications, CRC Press 
2. Large Area and Flexible Electronics, Mario Caironi & Yong -Young Noh (Editors 
(2015), WILEY-VCH 
3. Wong, William S., and Alberto Salleo, (Eds.) (2009) Flexible electronics: materials 
and applications. Vol. 11. Springer 
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Recent Journal Papers form Flexible and Printed Electronics, IOP , and Organic 
Electronics, Elsevier 
 
 
 
  
Title Antenna Engineering Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. IV Year, M. Tech., Ph.D.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite Electromagnetic Theory, Microwave Engineering   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Introduce the various concept of antenna design. 
2. familiarize the students with the application of different type of antennas 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Design low profile antennas and high gain antenna arrays for practical applications 
2.  Utilize simulation software e.g. HFSS, CST etc. for designing Antenna systems and test RF 
and microwave antennas 
Contents  
Introduction to Antennas: Radiation mechanism, Current distribution on a thin wire antenna, 
Review of Antenna Parameters; Friis Transmission formulae, Radar Range equation (7 
Lectures) 
Radiation Integrals and Auxiliary Potential Function Vector potential for electric current source 
and magnetic current source, inhomogeneous vector potential wave equa tion, duality theorem, 
reciprocity theorem (3 Lectures) 
Design of Dipole Antenna Design of Infinitesimal dipole, small dipole, half -wavelength dipole (4 
Lectures) 
Microstrip antenna Rectangular patch antenna, feeding methods, transmission line model, 
cavity model, Circular Patch Antenna  (4 Lectures) 
Low-profile Antenna Application: Mobile handset antenna - helical wire and variants; electrically 
small antenna; power factor, quality factor and bandwidth; radiation efficiency and realized 
gain;  PIFA;; On -chip antenna;  SAR measurement and miniaturization; GPS and Bluetooth 
antenna; medical application - antennas for medical imaging; heating; sensing; Automobile 
antennas- MAST antenna; Window glass antenna; Panel Antenna; (10 Lectures) 
Design of Antenna Arrays Analysis of Two element array, N -element linear array (uniform and 
nonuniform amplitude excitation: Binomial, Dolph -Tschebyscheff, Taylor distribution), planar 
array, Phased Array  (5 Lectures) 
Aperture Antenna Field equivalence principle, Radiation equati on, Rectangular aperture, 
circular aperture, Babinet‟s principle, Sectoral horn antenna, Pyramidal Horn antenna  (6 
Lectures) 
Antenna Measurement Antenna Ranges, Radiation Pattern measurement, Gain measurement 
(absolute gain method, gain comparison method), Directivity measurement  (3 Lectures) 
Textbook  
1. Balanis  C. A., Antenna Theory,  Analysis and Design, 4th edition, Wiley Press, 2016 
2. Krauss  J. D., Antennas and Wave Propagation, 4 th edition, Tata McGraw -Hill Education, 
2006 
3.  Elliott  R. S., Antenna Theory and Design, Wiley Press, 2006 
Self Learning Material  
1.   Vedio Lecture: Antenna Engineering, Dr. Anthony Ferraro, Penn State Univ., USA, 
http://www.engr.psu.edu/cde/courses/ee438/index.htm 
Preparatory Course Material  
1. NPTEL Lectures: Microwave Theory and Techniques, (Dr. Girish Kumar, IIT Bombay) 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108101112/ 
 
  
Title Digital VLSI Design Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. IV, M.Tech., Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Digital Electronics, Knowledge of MOS device physics   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
• Introduce the basics of digital circuit design methods.  
• Explain the necessary concepts for digital VLSI design according to design rules decided 
by various technologies. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
 Design and optimize digital circuits with different quality metrics: cost, speed, power 
dissipation, and reliability.   
 Learn about the major building blocks of digital systems 
Contents  
• Introduction:Review of VLSI, Historical Perspect ive, Issues in Digital IC design, Quality 
metrics. (2 Lectures) 
• Manufacturing: CMOS technology, Layout design & design rules, IC Packaging, future 
trends in process technology. (2 Lectures) 
• Devices and Interconnects:  MOS devices, MOS transistor models, Technology Scaling, 
Effect of Process variations, Interconnect and wire models. (4 Lectures) 
• CMOS Circuits: CMOS Inverter, Static and Dynamic Behaviour, Propagation delay, noise 
margins, and power dissipation, Impact of tech nology scaling, logical efforts. (7 
Lectures) 
• Designing combinational logic gates: Static CMOS design, Ratioed Logic, Pseudo NMOS, 
Pass Transistors Logic, Dynamic CMOS design, speed and power dissipation, choosing a 
logic style (7 lectures).  
• Design of sequential logic circuits:  Static Latches and Registers, Dy namic Latches and 
Registers, Alternative Register styles, pipelining, choosing a clock strategy. (3 Lectures) 
• Timing Issues in Digital Circuits: Timing classification, Synchronous Design, 
Synchronous timing basics, Skew and Jitter, clock distribution techniques (5 Lectures). 
• Designing Arithmetic Blocks:  Data paths in Digital Processor Architecture, Adder, 
Multiplier, Shifter, power and speed tradeoff. (3 Lectures).  
• Designing Memories and Array Structures: Memory Classification, Memory Architecture 
and Building Blocks, Memory core, Read only Memory, Read -write Memories, Memory 
peripheral circuitry, Decoders, Sense Amplifiers, Buffers, reliability, power dissipation, 
future trends validation and test (7 Lectures).  
• Implementation strategies for digital IC s, Design Verification, Validation and Test, 
Introduction to HDL.(2 Lectures) 
 
 
 
Textbook  
1. Jan M. Rabaey, Anantha Chandrakasan, and Borivoje Nikolic, (2016), Digital integrated 
Circuits, A design perspective, 2nd Edition, 2nd Edition, Pearson. 
2. Neil H.E. Weste, David Money Harris, (2010), CMOS VLSI Design: A Circuits and 
Systems Perspective, 4th Edition, Pearson. 
3. Sung-Mo-Kang, Yusuf Leblebici, (2016), CMOS Digital Integrated Circuits Analysis & 
Design, 4th Edition, Mc-Graw Hill. 
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Jan M. Rabaey, Anantha Chandrakasan, and Borivoje Nikolic, online Video 
lectureshttp://bwrcs.eecs.berkeley.edu/Classes/icdesign/ee241_s01/Lectures/ 
 
 
 
  
Title Wireless Communications Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. IV, M.Tech., Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Fundamentals of Communications   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide students an understanding of the concepts related to communication overwireless 
fading channel. 
2.  Expose students to  concepts and techniques for exploiting fading and applicationof these 
concepts in multiuser communication systems context. 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Understand concepts related to deep fade, diversity techniques and channelcapacity for 
point-to-point wireless communications systems. 
2. A nalyze multi -user networks and understanding of techniques likeopportu nistic 
communication, multiuser diversity, superposition coding and successiveinterference 
cancellation. 
3.  A nalyze and design wireless ad -hoc networks with special emphasis on energyconstrained 
networks 
 
Contents  
Wireless Channels : Modelling of wireless  channels; space, time and frequency 
channelcoherence; input/output channel models for single and multi -antenna systems  (7 
lectures) 
Diversity: Digital modulation and its performance in fading; inter -symbol interference; 
realizingdiversity: time diversity,  frequency diversity, antenna diversity; code design for 
wirelesschannels (14 lectures) 
Wireless Channel Capacity : Capacity of the Gaussian channels; capacity of fading channels  (7 
lectures) 
Multiuser system design : Multiple access and random access techni ques; multiuser channel  
capacity (7 lectures) 
Ad hoc wireless network : design principles, protocol layers, network capacity limits, 
andenergy-constrained networks. (7 lectures) 
 
 
 
Textbook  
1. Tse, D. and Viswanath, P., (2005), Fundamentals of wireless communication, Cambridge 
University Press. 
2.  Goldsmith, A., (2005), Wireless Communications, Cambridge University Press. 
3.  Simon, M. K. and Alouini, M. S., (2004 ), Digital communication over fading channels , John 
Wiley and Sons. 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Zheng, L., Principles of Wireless Communications, MIT OpenCourseWare, Electrical 
Engineering & Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-452-principles-
of-wireless-communications-spring-2006/index.htm 
 
PreparatoryCourse Material  
1. Jagannatham, A. K., Principles of Communication II , NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Electrical Engineering,        Indian Institute of Technology 
Kanpur,https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108104098/ 
2. Zheng, L. and Gallager, R., Principles of Digital Communications I , MIT OpenCourseWare, 
Electrical Engineering & Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-450-principles-of-
digital-communications-i-fall-2006/ 
 
 
  
Title Image Sensor Design and Applications Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech. IV, M. Tech, Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Analog electronics   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Introduce the design and analysis of CMOS image sensors.  
2.  Explain the readout electronics behind the camera. 
3.  Provide the knowledge of performance measures and tradeoffs involved in the 
camera design. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Design and develop CMOS image sensor including the sensing mechanism and signal 
chain of the camera. 
2.  Implement different techniques required for hig h dynamic range camera, high frame 
rate, low noise camera, time of flight 3D cameras etc. 
 
Contents 
 
Introduction to photodetectors: Photodiode and photogate, photocurrent, dark current, 
quantum efficiency, spectral response and photo-conversion principles (5 Lectures). 
Introduction to Charge coupled devices and CMOS image sensors:  Operation, 
performance metrics, noise and its types, spatial resolution and modulation transfer 
function.  Concept of exposure triangle including aperture, shutter speed and ISO, color 
filters, Bayer pattern, Shutters and its types, motion blur, hard and soft reset, 
Introduction to imaging optics (8 Lectures). 
Readout electronics and image sensor characterization: Readout and its types, design 
tradeoffs and challenges, analysis of t he signal path behind the camera, variable gain 
amplifiers, double sampling circuits,  ADCs, reference circuits including BGR and LDO, 
clock generation circuits including PLL and delay elements, floor planning, placement 
and routing, image sensor character ization. Introduction to wire bonding, packaging, 
lens and color filters for product level design (15 Lectures). 
Emerging trends :High speed cameras, high dynamic range cameras, 3D cameras for 
background light subtraction and depth estimation. Concepts of P olarization imaging, 
low light imaging, machine vision, backside illumination, stacked technology, target 
tracking (10 Lectures).  
Color Processing: Color demosaicing, color correction and white balance (2 Lectures). 
Applications:Smart city, health care, autonomous vehicles, sports, motion detection, 
surveillance (2 Lectures). 
Textbook  
1. Jun Ohta, (2007), Smart CMOS Image sensors and Applications, CRC press. 
 
Self Learning Material  
1. O. Yadid Pecht and R. E. Cummings (2004), CMOS imagers: From Photo 
transduction to Image processing, Springer. 
2. Image sensors blog http://image-sensors-world.blogspot.com/ 
 
Preparatory Course Material  
1. El Gamal, Abbas, and Helmy Eltoukhy  (2005) "CMOS image sensors."  IEEE Circuits 
and Devices Magazine vol. 21, no. 3, pages 6-20.  
2. Fossum, Eric R. (1997) "CMOS image sensors: Electronic camera -on-a-chip." IEEE 
transactions on electron devices vol. 44. no. 10, pages 1689-1698.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Title Radio Frequency Integrated Circuit Design Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P 
[C] 
3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. (IV Year), M.Tech, and PhD Students Type Elective 
Prerequisite Analog electronics, Communication 
engineering, Microwave engineering. 
  
bjectives  
1. To introduce the students with the integrated circuit designing at radio frequencies.  
2. Introduction of various circuits and building blocks for communication applications. 
Learning Outcomes  
1. Understanding the design of integrated circuits at high frequencies. 
2. Practical implementation of various circuits required to build a transceiver system.  
3. Learning about the design of various active components like mixers, LNAs, power 
amplifiers at RF and microwave frequencies. 
Contents  
Communication System Overview: Modulation, Mobile Systems, Multiple Access 
Techniques, Wireless Standards. (3 lectures) 
Noise:  Noise spectrum, effect of transfer function on noise, noise in a circuit, device 
noise. (4 lectures) 
Transceiver Architectures: Heterodyne Receivers, Direct -Conversion Receivers, 
Image Reject and Low IF Receivers, Transmitter Architectures. (4 lectures) 
Concepts of RF Design: Wave Guides and Transmission Lines, coupled lines, S -
Parameters, Smith Chart, si ngle and double stub impedance matching, Two -port gain 
and stability analysis. (10 lectures) 
Amplifier Design: Concepts of nonlinearity, time variance and IIP3, model of MOS 
transistors and BJT at high frequencies, wideband amplifiers, constant gain amplif ier, 
constant noise figure amplifier, power amplifiers, combining networks. (8 lectures)  
Oscillators and Voltage Controlled Oscillators:  Basic topologies VCO and definition 
of phase noise. Noise -power trade-off, quadrature and single -sideband generators. ( 5 
lectures) 
Mixers: Mixer Noise figure, port to port feed -through, single -balanced and double 
balanced mixers. (4 lectures) 
Introduction to Phase -Locked Loops: Type I and Type II PLL‟s , PLL Non -idealities. 
(4 lectures) 
Textbooks 
1. T. H. Lee, the Design of CMOS Radio-Frequency Integrated Circuits. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press, 1997. 
2. B. Razavi, RF Microelectronics, 2nd Edition, Pearson Education, 2014. 
3. G. Gonzalez, Microwave Transistor Amplifiers: Analysis and Design, 2 nd edition, 
Pearson, Aug-1996. 
 
Self Learning Materials  
 
1. RF Integrated Circuits, NPTEL, Dr. S. Chatterjee, IIT Delhi, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/117102012/# 
 
2. High Speed Communication Circuits, MIT, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-
engineering-and-computer-science/6-776-high-speed-communication-circuits-
spring-2005/lecture-notes/ 
 
Preparatory Course Materials 
1. B. P. Lathi, Z. Ding, Modern Digital and Analog Communications Systems, 4 th 
edition, Oxford university press, July-2017. 
2. D. M. Pozar, Microwave Engineering, 4th edition, New York, NY, USA: Wiley, 2011. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Title VLSI Design Lab Number EEP7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 0–0–2 [1] 
Offered for M. Tech. 1st year Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
 
Objective 
1. To introduce students with the designing of combinational and sequential circuits. 
2. To familiarize students with the designing of various building blocks related to 
analog design.  
3. To familiarize students with the process design kits and tools like Cadence/Mentor 
Graphics. 
4. To aware the students with pre-layout and post-layout simulations. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Students will be able to understand the design issues and challenges involved in 
practical design. 
2. Knowledge of design tools like Cadence and process design kits. 
3. Students will be able to perform different analysis (DC, AC, transient etc. ) and 
design steps involved in tape-out. 
 
Contents 
• Experiments related to digital design 
 Design of static logic gates with passive and active load, plot voltage 
transfer characteristics and calculate noise margin. 
 Design and layout of switches including pass transistor and transmission 
gates. 
 Combinational circuit design with placement and routing considerations. 
 Implementation of different functions with dynamic and domino logic 
style. 
 Sequential logic design, clock issues and timing constraints. 
 
• Experiments related to analog design 
 Design of common source, common gate and common drain amplifier for 
given specifications. 
 Design problems related to wide swing, high gain, high bandwidth, low 
power and low noise differential amplifier. 
 Design of a differential amplifier with current-mirror/active load. 
 Design of a high speed, low power voltage mode and current mode 
comparators. 
 Design and perform DC, AC, noise, transient analysis of a two-stage op-
amp. 
 
 
 
  
Title Sensors and IoT Lab Number EEP7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 0–0–2 [1] 
Offered for M. Tech. 1st year Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
 
Objective 
1. To introduce students with sensors fabrication 
2. To familiarize students with measurement instruments like Spectrum and Vector Network 
Analyzer 
3. To introduce students with various kits and components required for IoT applications 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Familiarization with sensor fabrication process and characterization 
2. Handling high frequency measurement instruments 
3. Implementation of various circuits required to build a transceiver 
 
Contents 
The lab course will be dependent on the  various core and elective components of the program. 
There will be a scope for modifying the contents depending on the recent developments in 
technology. Experiments from some of the following topics will be part of this lab.  
 
• Implementation of Signal Conditioning Circuits  
• Implementation of IoT components using Hardware/Software 
• Sensor interfacing using off-the-shelf components 
• Sensor Design, Fabrication and Characterization (Part of this in winter internship) 
• RF components characterization; Antennas and RF amplifiers 
• Implementation of real time examples of IoT using Embedded Systems 
• Selected experiments from Communication Systems 
• Recent topics of interest 
 
 
 
 
  
Title Nano Sensors Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. (IV year), M.Tech, and Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objective 
The Instructor will: 
1. Make the students understand the importance of nanoscale materials for sensing 
applications. 
2. Explain the approaches used for characterizing sensors based nanomaterials. 
3. Teach the approaches used for tailoring nanomaterials for a specific sensing application.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
Students are expected to learn 
1. Identify the most appropriate Nanosensors for scientific applications.  
2. Understand the underlying sensing phenomena used in nanosensors;  
3. Reliably process, evaluate and interpret the information presented by nanosensors;  
 
Contents 
Nanomaterials and Properties: Nanoscale physics for quantum dot, nanowire and quantum 
wells; Properties of nanomaterials; nanomechanical oscillators, nano(bio)electronics, nanoscale 
heat transfer; fluids at nanoscale  (8 lectures)  
Nanoscale Characterization: Examination of nanoscale characterization approaches 
including imaging, scattering, and spectroscopic techniques and their physical operating 
mechanisms.  Microscopy (optical and electron: SEM, TEM); scattering & diffraction; 
spectroscopies (EDX, SIMS, Mass spec, Raman, XPS, XAS); scanning probe microscopes (SPM, 
AFM); particle size analysis (8 lectures) 
Nanofabrication:Basic engineering principles of nanofabrication. Topics include: photo-, 
electron beam and nanoimprint lithography, block of copolymers and self-assembled 
monolayers, colloidal assembly, biological nanofabrication (8 lectures) 
Nanosensors: Nanosensors based on metal nanoparticles, semi-conductor nanowires and 
nanocrystals and carbon nanotubes etc. (10 lectures) 
Case Studies of Nanosensors:  Optical, mechanical and chemical sensors based on 
nanomaterials, Hybrid nanomaterial-based sensors, Quantum wells based IR sensors (8 
lectures) 
 
 
 
Text Books 
1. Mindy Adams, (2016) Engineered Nanomaterials: Modeling, Methodologies and 
Applications, Wellford Press 
2. John Hutchison, Angus Kirkland, (2007) Nano characterisation, RSC  
3. Roger George Jackson, (2004) Novel Sensors and Sensing, CRC Press  
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Research articles such as ACS Nano Letters, ACS Sensors, ACS Nano, Sensors & 
actuators B etc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Title Active Filter Design Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. (IV Year), M.Tech, and Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide theoretical and practical aspects of active filter design 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Design analog filters using active components. 
2.  Design customized filter for specific applications using approximation theory  
 
Contents  
Review of Network Theorems including Reciprocity and Tellegen‟s theorem, scattering 
parameters, properties of lossless passive networks. (4 Lectures) 
Butterworth approximation; Chebyshev approximation; synthesis of Butterworthand 
Chebyshev filters; odd ver sus even order filters; sensitivity of lossless LC  ladder 
filtersFrequency transformations; inverse Chebyshev and ellipticapproximations; synthesis of 
inverse Chebyshev and elliptic filters; Darlington synthesis; signal flow graphs of ladder  filters. 
(20 Lectures) 
Opamp-RC implementation; Gm -C implementation; switched -capacitorimplementation; 
minimum required performance of active components.T uning offilters; transmission line based 
filters: using high -Z low -Z technique, usingKuroda's identities; bi -quad ba sed design 
approaches and drawbacks; Tow-Thomas biquad, Sallen-Key biquad. (18 Lectures) 
Textbook  
1. Schaumann, R., Xiao, H., Valkenburg, M.V., (2009), “ Design of Analog Filters 2nd Edition ”, 
2nd Edition, Oxford University Press 
2. Tsividis, Y.P., Voorman, J.O., (1993), “ Integrated Continuous -Time Filters: Principles ”, 
Design, and Applications, IEEE 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. Pavan, S., Active Filter Design , Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of 
Technology Madras, http://www.ee.iitm.ac.in/videolectures/doku.php?id=ee534:start 
  
Title Millimeter-wave Technology Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. (IV Year), M.Tech, and PhD Students Type Elective 
Prerequisite Electromagnetic theory, Microwave engineering   
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1.  Introduce the students with the phenomenon and circuit characteristics at mm -wave 
frequency ranges. 
2.  Introduce various guiding structures, antennas, and switches at mm-wave frequencies 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Understand the design problems and challenges at mm-wave frequencies 
2.  design various mm-wave guiding structures, passive and active circuits 
 
Contents  
Introduction to millimeter -wave technology : mm-wave frequency bands, atmospheric 
losses, application of mm -waves, Propagation and path losses, Friis equation, link budget and 
power budget calculation. (4 lectures) 
Novel Guiding structures for mmwave circuits:  losses in planar circuits (conductor loss, 
leakage loss, dielectric loss, surface waves), Air filled waveguides, dielectric guides, NRD 
guide, substrate integrated waveguides (SIW), Substrate Integrated NRD (SINRD), Gap 
Waveguide, dielectric image line, p lanar air filled waveguide, Waveguide and planar 
resonators, Dielectric resonators, loaded, unloaded, and external Q -factors, SPST and SPDT 
switches. (8 lectures) 
Beam-forming network: Introduction to mmwave circuits: hybrid coupler, crossover, phase 
shifter, butler matrix, nolen matrix, Rotman lens. (5 lectures)  
Millimeter wave antennas: Problem with traditional antennas, horn antenna, dielectric rod 
antenna, Leaky wave antenna, waveguide slot array, chain antenna array, on chip antennas, 
monopulse radar network, transmitarray, reflectarray, millimeterwave over the air (OTA) 
measurement testing: Total Radiated Power (TRP), Total Isotropic Sensitivity (TIS), Effective 
Isotropic Radiated Power (EIRP), Effective Isotropic Sensitivity (EIS). (10 lectures) 
Packaging and interconnects: Challenges in packaging, design of interconnects at mm -
wave frequencies, bondwire interconnections, ball-grid array. (3 lectures) 
Millimeterwave Active circuits: mmwave CMOS circuits: LNA,Oscillator, VCO , Power 
Amplifier, Frequency Synthesizer, SoC for mmwave RADAR, FinFET (10 Lectures) 
Case Studies: mmwave transciever for 5G, industrial radar sensor (2 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. KoulS.K., (1997), Millimeter Wave and Optical Dielectric Integrated Guides and Circuits, 
Wiley-Blackwell 
2. Courtney D. Liu, B. Gaucher, U. Pfeiffer, and J. Grzyb,  (2009), Advanced millimeter wave 
technologies, Wiley. 
3. Hueber, G., & Niknejad, A. (Eds.). (2019). Millimeter -Wave Circuits for 5G and Radar (The 
Cambridge RF and Microwave Engineering Series). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Mandal M. K., Millimeter -wave technology, NPTEL course material, Department of 
Electronics and Electrical Communication Engineering, IIT Kharagpur,  
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117105139/ 
2. TI Training & Vedios, (2017), mmWave RADAR in ADAS Applications, 
https://training.ti.com/mmwave-radar-adas-applications 
PreparatoryCourse Material 
1. D. M. Pozar, (2011), Microwave Engineering, 4th Ed. New York, NY, USA: Wiley 
 
 
  
Title Selected Topics In Sensors and IoT I Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 
Offered for M.Tech., PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite Fundamentals of sensors   
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Expose the students to the latest upcoming fields in the area of sensors and IoT 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply the knowledge of recent topics  in the field of sensors and IoT  to specific areas of 
research  
 
Contents  
The topic clouds for the course include some contemporary topics in sensors and IoT  (but not 
restricted to) like Nanosensors, MEMS/NE MS sensors, biosensors modeling and design, 
industrial IoT. The topics may be further updated according to the instructor. 
 
Textbook  
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
 
  
 
Title Selected Topics In Sensors and IoT II Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 
Offered for M.Tech., PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite Fundamentals of sensors   
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Expose the students to the latest upcoming fields in the area of sensors and IoT 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply the knowledge of recent topics   in the field of sensors and IoT  to specific areas of 
research  
 
Contents  
The topic clouds for the course include some contemporary topics in sensors and IoT  (but not 
restricted to) like Nanosensors, MEMS/NEMS sensors, biosensors modeling and design, 
industrial IoT. The topics may be further updated according to the instructor. 
 
Textbook  
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
  
 
Title Selected Topics In Sensors and IoT III Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech., PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite Fundamentals of sensors   
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Expose the students to the latest upcoming fields in the area of sensors and IoT 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply the knowledge of recent topics   in the field of sensors and IoT  to specific areas of 
research  
 
Contents  
The topic clouds for the course include some contemporary topics in sensors and IoT  (but not 
restricted to) like Nanosensors, MEMS/NEMS sensors, biosensors modeling and design, 
industrial IoT. The topics may be further updated according to the instructor. 
 
Textbook  
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
M. Tech. – Ph. D. Dual Degree 
 
in 
 
Communications and Signal Processing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 
During the past few years, there has been an exponential growth in the usage of internet. The fast 
development of economy and society requires modern and high -performance communications 
systems that can cater for massive deployment of Internet of Things, while still offering acceptable 
levels of energy consumption, equipment cost and network deployment and operation cost. It 
needs to support a wide variety of applications a nd services requiring increased spectral efficiency, 
higher data rates, low latency and high reliability. Communications and Signal processing is one of 
the key technologies to meet the growing connectivity requirements for new use cases (e.g. for 
ultra-low latency or high reliability cases) and new applications for the industry, opening up new 
revenue streams also for operators. The M. Tech. -Ph. D. Dual Degree programme in 
Communications and Signal Processing prepares students for an advanced engineering c areer by 
in-depth understanding of modern communication networks on all layers and their associated 
signal processing methods. The program provides students an opportunity to learn the 
specialization in depth by updating and renewing their technical knowle dge in a rapidly changing 
telecommunication industry. 
 
Objective of the Program 
Graduates from the program will have in -depth knowledge and critical awareness of theoretical and 
practical solutions to problems at the forefront of communications and the pro cessing of signals. 
They would be ready for careers in fields such as development, research, operations and 
management of next-generation telecommunication networks and information processing systems. 
 
Graduate attributes 
 The graduates of this program will  have strong fundamentals in modern communications 
technology and signal processing methods. 
 Understanding of cutting-edge research on future generations of wireless communication.  
 Analytical and experimental skills required to design and implement next -generation 
communication systems for various applications like Internet-of-Things, smart health, Smart 
City, Intelligent Transportation Systems 
 Ability to do critical and creative thinking, and to conduct independent and original research 
and scholarship 
 Ability to apply existing skills and knowledge to identify and formulate new problems, 
produce new ideas, approaches or actions 
 Ability to teach and express ideas in both written and oral formats 
 
Learning outcome 
• Ability to statistically characterize and evaluate the performance of communication systems. 
• Ability to apply the different methods for signal detection and estimation to real world 
engineering problems and advanced research 
• Develop understanding of cutting -edge research on future generations of wir eless 
communication.   
• Analyze multi -user networks and understanding of techniques like opportunistic 
communication, multiuser diversity, superposition coding and successive interference 
cancellation 
• Implement end-to-end wireless communication systems with various MIMO technologies like 
maximal ratio combining, OFDM, interleaving/de-interleaving, and Alamouti codes 
• Ability to  
• Master a specific set of methods appropriate to their dissertation, with the depth needed to 
produce methodologically rigorous research. 
• Carry out research work demonstrating scientific problem solving and generate IPR  
 
Program’s Structure 
Overall Structure (M. Tech. Degree Requirements for Communications and Signal Processing) 
 
Category M. Tech. 
Compulsory (MC) 
M. Tech.  Elective (ME) M. Tech. Open 
(MO) 
M. Tech. 
Project 
(MP) 
Total Graded 
Credits 17 17 6 16 56 
 
Semester wise distribution of credits 
Cat. Course Title L-T-P Credits  Cat. Course Title L-T-P Credits 
I Semester  II Semester 
MC Statistical Signal Analysis  3-0-0 3  MC Data Communication and 
Networking  
3-0-0 3 
MC Wireless Communications 3-0-0 3  MC MIMO Wireless Communications 3-0-0 3 
MC Advanced Digital Signal Processing 3-0-0 3  ME Program Elective-2 3-0-0 3 
MC Digital Signal Processing  Lab 0-0-2 1  ME Program Elective-3 3-0-0 3 
MC Communications Engineering Lab 0-0-2 1  ME Program Elective Lab 1-0-2 2 
ME Program Elective-1 3-0-0 3  NG Innovation and IP Management  1-0-0 1 
NG Technical Communication 1-0-0 1      
Total (Graded + Non-graded) 15  Total (Graded + Non-graded) 15 
III Semester  IV Semester 
MP Project-1 0-0-10 5  MP Project-2 0-0-22 11 
ME Program Elective-4 3-0-0 3  MO Open Elective-2 3-0-0 3 
ME Program Elective-5 3-0-0 3  NG Professional Ethics 1-0-0 1 
MO Open Elective-1 3-0-0 3      
NG Systems Engineering and Project 
Management 
1-0-0 1      
Total (Graded+ Non-graded) 15  Total (Graded + Non-graded) 15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Topic Clouds 
 
Semester I 
Statistical Signal 
Analysis 
Wireless 
Communications 
Advanced Digital 
Signal Processing 
Digital Signal 
Processing Lab 
Communications 
Engineering Lab 
 Random Processes 
 Stationarity and 
Ergodicity 
 Random parameter 
estimation 
 Non-random 
parameter 
estimation 
 Multiple parameter 
estimation 
 Fading channel 
models 
 Error performance 
in AWGN and fading 
channels 
 Diversity 
Techniques 
 Capacity of fading 
channels 
 Multiuser systems - 
multiple and 
random access 
techniques 
 Multiuser diversity 
 Ad-Hoc Networks 
 
 Review of Fourier 
Analysis 
 Short time Fourier 
Transform 
 Resolution 
concepts 
 Wavelet 
Transform 
 Multi rate 
systems 
 Finite word length 
effects 
 Digital signal 
processor 
architecture 
 Interface hardware 
and software 
systems 
 Comparative study 
of microprocessor, 
ASIC and DSP 
 Implementation of 
ADC, convolution, 
FIR, IIR, FFT and 
spectral estimation 
techniques 
 
 Introduction to  
instruments like 
vector signal 
analyzer, spectrum 
analyzer 
 Implementation of 
end-to-end 
communication 
systems 
 Implementation of 
Equalizers 
 Implementation of 
Alamouti codes 
 
 
Semester II 
MIMO Wireless Communications Data Communication and Networking 
 MIMO channel models 
 Receiver architectures 
 Diversity multiplexing gain tradeoff 
 Space-time code design 
 Multiuser MIMO 
 Massive MIMO 
 Fundamentals of Data Communication 
 Network layer and topology design 
 Network Management 
 Mechanisms to improve performance 
 Transport and Application Layers 
 Reliability and security 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Complete List of Program Electives 
 
Course Title L-T-P Credits  Course Title L-T-P Credits 
Coding Theory 3-0-0 3  Free Space Optical Communications 3-0-0 3 
Antenna Engineering 3-0-0 3  GNSS Signal Processing 3-0-0 3 
Advanced Digital Communication 3-0-0 3  Backhaul Networks for Wireless 
Systems 
3-0-0 3 
Network Information Theory 3-0-0 3  Selected Topics in Communication I 1-0-0 1 
Statistical Decision Theory 2-0-0 2  Selected Topics in Communication II 2-0-0 2 
Multi-rate Digital Signal Processing  2-0-0 2  Selected Topics in Communication III 3-0-0 3 
Digital Image Processing and 
Applications 
3-0-0 3  Neuromorphic computing and design 3-0-0 3 
Digital  Video Processing 3-0-0 3  Machine Learning 2 3-0-0 3 
RF IC Design 3-0-0 3  Real Time Communications 3-0-0 3 
Adaptive Signal Processing 3-0-0 3  Millimeter Wave Technology (SM) 3-0-0 3 
Optical Fiber Communications 3-0-0 3  Digital Image and Video Processing Lab 1-0-2 2 
Image sensor Design and Application 3-0-0 3  RF IC Design Lab 1-0-2 2 
Applied Optimization for Wireless 
Communication 
3-0-0 3  Network Information Theory 3-0-0 3 
Machine Learning for Communications  3-0-0 3  Graph Theory 3-0-0 3 
Machine Learning 1 3-0-0 3  Matrix Computations 1-0-0 1 
Optimization 1-0-0 1  Wavelets 3-0-0 3 
Physical Layer Security 3-0-0 3  Computational Imaging  3-0-0 3 
Compressive Sensing  3-0-0 3  Speech and Audio Processing  3-0-0 3 
Bio-Image Computing 3-0-0 3  Selected Topics in Signal Processing II 2-0-0 2 
Selected Topics in Signal Processing I 1-0-0 1  Data Compression  3-0-0 3 
Selected Topics in Signal Processing III 3-0-0 3  Machine Learning for Communication 
Lab 
1-0-2 2 
Multimedia Communications 3-0-0 3     
Note: Machine Learning 1 and 2, Bio -Image Computing, and Neuromorphic computing and design 
will be offered by CSE, while Graph Theory, Matrix Computations, and Optimization will be offered 
by Mathematics Department. The course contents are available in the respective booklets. 
 
Advisory for Program Electives 
 
Course Title L-T-P Credits  Course Title L-T-P Credits 
Program Elective -1    Program Elective Lab   
Coding Theory 3-0-0 3  Digital image and Video Processing Lab 1-0-2 2 
Antenna Engineering 3-0-0 3  RF IC Design Lab 1-0-2 2 
Machine Learning 1 3-0-0 3  Machine Learning for Communication 
Lab 
1-0-2 2 
Advanced Digital Communication 3-0-0 3     
Selected Topics in Communication I  1-0-0 1     
Selected Topics in Communication II 2-0-0 2     
Selected Topics in Communication III 3-0-0 3  Program Elective -4,5   
Matrix Computations 1-0-0 1  Free Space Optical Communications 3-0-0 3 
Optimization 1-0-0 1  GNSS Signal Processing 3-0-0 3 
    Millimeter Wave Technology 3-0-0 3 
Program Elective -2,3    Selected Topics in Communication I  1-0-0 1 
Statistical Decision Theory 2-0-0 2  Selected Topics in Communication II 2-0-0 2 
Optimal Filtering 3-0-0 3  Selected Topics in Communication III 3-0-0 3 
Digital Video Processing 3-0-0 3  Neuromorphic computing and design 3-0-0 3 
Digital Image Processing and 
Applications 
3-0-0 3  Machine Learning for Communications 3-0-0 3 
Selected Topics in Communication I  1-0-0 1  Real Time Communications 3-0-0 3 
Selected Topics in Communication II 2-0-0 2  Backhaul Networks for Wireless 
Systems 
3-0-0 3 
Selected Topics in Communication III 3-0-0 3  Computational Imaging 3-0-0 3 
Multi-rate Digital Signal Processing 2-0-0 2  Wavelets 3-0-0 3 
RF IC Design 3-0-0 3  Speech and Audio Signal  Processing 3-0-0 3 
Graph Theory 3-0-0 3  Selected Topics in Signal Processing I  1-0-0 1 
Adaptive Signal Processing 3-0-0 3  Selected Topics in Signal Processing II 2-0-0 2 
Optical Fiber Communications 3-0-0 3  Selected Topics in Signal Processing III 3-0-0 3 
Image sensor Design and Application 3-0-0 3     
Applied Optimization for Wireless 
Communication 
3-0-0 3     
Data Compression 3-0-0 3     
Machine Learning 2 3-0-0 3     
Network Information Theory 3-0-0 3     
Physical Layer Security 3-0-0 3     
Compressive Sensing  3-0-0 3     
Bio-Image Computing 3-0-0 3     
Selected Topics in Signal Processing I  1-0-0 1     
Selected Topics in Signal Processing II 2-0-0 2     
Selected Topics in Signal Processing III 3-0-0 3     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Detailed Course Contents 
 
Title Statistical Signal Analysis 
 
Number EEL7XX0 
 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech-Ph.D. Dual Degree (Comm. Engg.)  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Knowledge of Probability Theory and Fundamentals of 
Communications 
  
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide background to understand different types of random processes 
2.  Introduce the different methods of parameter estimation 
 
Learning Outcomes  
     The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply the knowledge of random processes for statistical characterization of communication 
systems  
2. Apply the different methods for signal estimation to real world engineering problems and 
advanced research 
 
Contents  
(fractal 1) EEL7XX1 Characterization of Random processes: stationarity, mean, 
correlation, and covariance functions, WSS random process, autocorrelation and cross-
correlation functions, transmission of a random process through a linear filter, power spectral 
density, white random process, Gaussian process, Poisson process (14 Lectures) 
 
(fractal 2) EEL7XX2 Estimation Theory:Random parameter estimation: risk function, MMSE 
estimators, MAP estimators  (6 Lectures) 
Non-random parameter estimation: CRLB for non -random parameters,  ML estimation rule, 
asymptotic properties of ML estimates, linear minimum variance estimation, condition for 
statistical efficiency (8 Lectures) 
 
(fractal 3) EEL7XX3Multiple Parameter Estimation : estimation procedure, measures of 
error, properties and bounds on estimation errors for random and non -random parameters 
(14 Lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Papoulis, A. and Pillai, U. S., (2002), Probability, Random Variables, and Stochastic 
Processes, 4th Edition, Tata Mc-Graw Hill 
2. Van Trees, H. L., (2003), Detection, Estimation and Modulation Theory: Part -1, 2nd Edition, 
John Wiley 
3. Kay, S.M., (1998), Fundamentals of Statistical Signal Processing: Vol. 1 Estimation Theory , 
1st Edition, Prentice Hall 
 
Self-Learning Material 
1. Sinha, R., Signal Detection and Estimation Theory, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117103018/ 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. Thangraj, A., Probability Foundations for Electrical Engineers , NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117103018/ 
 
 
  
 
Title Wireless Communications Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.-Ph.D. Dual Degree (Comm. Engg.)  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Fundamentals of Communications   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide students an understanding of the concepts related to communication over wireless 
fading channel. 
2.  Expose students to concepts and techniques for exploiting fading and application of these 
concepts in multiuser communication systems context. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Understand concepts related to deep fade, diversity techniques and channel capacity for 
point-to-point wireless communications systems. 
2. Analyze multi -user networks and understanding of techniques like opportunistic 
communication, multiuser diversity, superposition coding and successive interference 
cancellation. 
3.  Analyze and design wireless ad -hoc networks with special emphasis on energy constrained 
networks 
 
Contents  
Wireless Channels : Modelling of wireless channels; spa ce, time and frequency channel 
coherence; input/output channel models for single and multi-antenna systems (7 lectures) 
Diversity: Digital modulation and its performance in fading; inter -symbol interference; realizing 
diversity: time diversity, frequency d iversity, antenna diversity; code design for wireless 
channels (14 lectures) 
Wireless Channel Capacity : Capacity of the Gaussian channels; capacity of fading channels (7 
lectures) 
Multiuser system design : Multiple access and random access techniques; multi user channel 
capacity (7 lectures) 
Ad hoc wireless network : design principles, protocol layers, network capacity limits, and 
energy-constrained networks. (7 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Tse, D. and Viswanath, P., (2005), Fundamentals of wireless communication , Cambridge 
University Press. 
2.  Goldsmith, A., (2005), Wireless Communications, Cambridge University Press. 
3.  Simon, M. K. and Alouini, M. S., (2004), Digital communication over fading channels , John 
Wiley and Sons. 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Zheng, L.,  Principles of Wireless Communications, MIT OpenCourseWare, Electrical 
Engineering & Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-452-principles-
of-wireless-communications-spring-2006/index.htm 
 
Preparatory Course Material  
1. Jagannatham, A. K., Principles of Communication II , NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Electrical Engineering,       Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108104098/  
2. Zheng, L. and Gallager, R., Principles of Digital Communications I , MIT OpenCourseWare, 
Electrical Engineering & Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-450-principles-of-
digital-communications-i-fall-2006/ 
 
 
  
 
Title Advanced Digital Signal Processing Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech., M.Tech., Ph.D. Type Core 
Prerequisite Signals and Systems   
 
Objectives 
     The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide students an understanding of analysis and synthesis of algorithms and systems that 
process discrete time signals, with emphasis on realization and implementation 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Interpret and process discrete/digital signal and systems 
2.  Analyze and provide solutions to practical implementation issues of DSP systems 
 
Contents  
Review of Fourier analysis Discrete time systems, DTFT, Z-transform, Analysis of LSI systems, 
DFT and FFT (9 lectures) 
Time-frequency representation; frequency scale and resolution; uncertainty principle, short-
time Fourier transform (5 lectures) 
Multi-resolution concept and analysis, Wavelet transforms (CWT, DWT) (4 lectures) 
Families of wavelets: Orthogonal and bi orthogonal wavelets Daubechies‟ family of orthogonal 
wavelets, elements of multi-rate systems and two band filter bank design for dyadic wavelets 
(10 lectures) 
Multirate systems: sampling rate conversion, implementation of Multirate systems, filter design 
for Multirate systems, two channel filter banks and multi-channel filter banks. (5 lectures) 
Finite wordlength effects: Number representation, statistical analysis of quantization error, 
quantization of Fixed-point and Floating point numbers, A/D and D/A conversion, A/D 
conversion noise analysis, quantization of filter coefficients, Effects of finite wordlength on 
digital filters. (6 lectures) 
Applications of ADSP (3 lectures) 
 
 
 
Textbook 
1. Proakis, J. G. and Manolakis,D.G., (2007), Digital Signal Processing , 4 th Edition, Prentice 
Hall  
2. Mitra, S. K., (2008), Digital Signal Processing, 3nd Edition, McGraw Hill  
3. Manolakis,D.G., and Ingle, V., (2011), Applied Digital Signal Processing, 1st Edition, 
Cambridge University Press 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Basu, T. K., Digital Signal Processing , NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108105055/ 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. Jagannatham, A. K., Principles of Signals and Systems , NPTEL Course Material, Department 
of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108104100/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Title Digital Signal Processing Lab Number EEP7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 0–0–2 [1] 
Offered for M.Tech. - Ph.D. Dual Degree (Comm. Engg.)  Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Help design and implement a DSP system using DSP kits. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Implement algorithms on DSP kits. 
2.  Make choice of specific DSP architecture for given application. 
 
Contents  
 
An introduction to Digital Signal Processors and the associated interface hardware and 
software systems 
Basic exercises in programming Digital Signal Processors, signal generation, processing 
and file I/O 
The Joint “systems – algorithms – architectures” perspective as a holistic approach in 
Signal Processing applications 
Comparative studies between general purpose microprocessors/computing devices and 
specialized application specific integrated circuits (ASICs) and digital signal 
processors. 
Study and implementation of Analog to Digital Conversion, sa mpling and 
reconstruction, simple Discrete Time Systems, Finite Impulse Response Filters, and 
Infinite Impulse Response Filters. 
Fast Fourier Transforms and Spectral Estimation – Algorithms, Implementation. 
Realization and implementation of computationally  efficient Digital Signal Processing 
structures like the lattice structure, ladder structure. 
 
Textbook  
1. Venkataramani, B., and Bhaskar, M., (2011), Digital Signal Processors: Architecture, 
Programming and Applications, 2nd Edition, Tata McGraw Hill  
 
2. Proakis, J. G., and Manolakis, D. G., (1997), Digital Signal Processing – Principles, 
Algorithms and Applications, 3rd Edition, Prentice Hall of India  
 
3. Udayashankara, V., (2010), Real Time Digital Signal Processing, Fundamentals, 
Algorithms and Implementation Using TMS Processor, Prentice Hall India 
 
Self-Learning Material 
1. Manuals for DSP Kits and MATLAB literature on Mathworks website 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Jagannatham, A. K., Principles of Signals and Systems , NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108104100/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Title Communications Engineering Lab Number EEP7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 0–0–2 [1] 
Offered for M.Tech.-Ph.D. Dual Degree (Comm. Engg.) Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Fundamentals of Communications   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Familiarize students with the baseband generation software tools and the 
measurement instruments. 
2.  Expose students to end-to-end implementation of wireless communication systems. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Design, test and evaluate communication systems. 
2.  Implement end -to-end wireless co mmunication systems with various MIMO 
technologies like maximal ratio combining, OFDM, interleaving/de -interleaving, and 
Alamouti codes. 
 
Contents  
An introduction to measurement equipment like Signal Analyzer, AFG, Oscilloscope.  
Study and implementation o f end-to-end single antenna communication system with - 
Continuous Wave Carrier, I -Q modulation with coherent and non -coherent signaling, 
BPSK modulation with channel coding techniques. 
Implementation and demonstration of effect of channel fading in wirele ss 
communication systems 
Study and implementation of various MIMO receiver architectures, diversity techniques 
(Time (Linear Block Codes with interleaving/de -interleaving), frequency (coded OFDM) 
and antenna diversity (Alamouti code). 
 
Textbook  
1. Tse, D.  and Viswanath, P., (2005), Fundamentals of wireless communication , 
Cambridge University Press. 
2.  Goldsmith, A., (2005), Wireless Communications, Cambridge University Press. 
3.  Simon, M. K. and Alouini, M. S., (2004), Digital communication over fading 
channels, John Wiley and Sons. 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. User manual for Signal Analyzer, AFG, and Oscilloscope. 
Preparatory Course Material  
1. Zheng, L. and Gallager, R., Principles of Digital Communications I , MIT 
OpenCourseWare,  Electrical Engineering & Computer Scie nce, Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical -engineering-and-computer-
science/6-450-principles-of-digital-communications-i-fall-2006/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Title Data Communication and Networking Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech (IV Year), M. Tech., PhD. Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Fundamentals of Wireless Communications   
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1.  Expose the students to distinguishing features of wireless networks 
 
Learning Outcomes  
     The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Design and optimize wireless network architectures. 
2. Implement security techniques for wireless networks. 
 
Contents  
Fundamentals: Layered architecture overview, data communication techniques, 
motivations for cross -layer protocol design, motivations for performance analysis, 
forward error correction and re-transmission performances (7 Lectures) 
Network layer and topology design: Markov and semi -Markov processes, Little‟s 
theorem, M/M/m/k, M/G/1 systems, priority queueing, network of queues, network 
traffic behavior, routing algorithms and analysis , distributed networks, design 
constraints, bounded latency networks, optimization, cognitive networks (10 Lectures) 
Network Management:Power management, time synchronization, localization, energy -
efficient protocols for sensor networks (7 Lectures) 
Mechanisms to improve performance : Self -Organizing Network, Software -Defined 
Networking (7 Lectures) 
Transport and Application Layers: congestion control and quality of service, scheduling , 
multimedia, key aspects and design issues (7 Lectures) 
Reliability and  security: Security requirement and attacks, Encryption techniques, 
reliable and secure communication protocols (4 Lectures) 
 
Textbook 
1. Dargie, W., and Poellabauer, C., (2010), Fundamentals ofWireless Sensor Networks: 
Theory and Practice, Wiley 
2. Stallings, W., (2007), Data and Computer Communications, 8th Edition, Pearson 
3. Bertsekas, D. P. and Gallager, R. G., (1992), Data Networks, 2nd Edition, Prentice 
Hall 
 
 
Self-Learning Material 
4. Mishra, S., Wireless Adhoc and Sensors Networks , NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Electrical and Electronics Communication Engineering, Ind ian 
Institute of Technology Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106105160/ 
5. Zou, Y., Zhu, J., Wang, X., and Hanzo, L., "A Survey on Wireless Security: Technical 
Challenges, Recent Advances, and Future Trends," in Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 
104, no. 9, pp. 1727-1765, Sept. 2016. 
6. W. Xia, Y. Wen, C. H. Foh, D. Niyato and H. Xie, "A Survey on Software -Defined 
Networking," in IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 27-51, 
First quarter 2015. 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
2. Zheng, L., Princ iples of Wireless Communications, MIT OpenCourseWare, Electrical 
Engineering & Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-452-
principles-of-wireless-communications-spring-2006/index.htm 
 
 
 
  
Title MIMO Wireless Communications Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.-Ph.D. Dual Degree (Comm. Engg.) Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Wireless Communications   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide exposure to the fundamental concepts and techniques of multiple -input 
multiple-output (MIMO) communications over wireless communication channels. 
2. Expose students to the massive MIMO theory that gives rise to improved reliability 
and increased data rates. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Understand the concepts and mathematical tools related to MIMO architecture like 
V-BLAST, D-BLAST, beamforming and diversity multiplexing gain tradeoff. 
2.  Analyze, design, and simulate MIMO communication systems with a special 
emphasis on space-time codes and signaling techniques for massive MIMO. 
 
Contents  
Channel Modeling and Spatial Multiplexing : Multiplexing Capability of Deterministic 
MIMO Channels, Physical Modeling of MIMO Channels, Modeling of MIMO Fading 
Channels (7 Lectures) 
Capacity and Multiplexing Architectures : The V -BLAST Architecture, Fast Fading MIMO 
Channel, Receiver Architectures, Slow Fading MIMO Channel, D -BLAST: An Outage -
Optimal Architecture (7 Lectures) 
Diversity-Multiplexing Tradeoff and Space -Time Codes: Diversity-Multiplexing Tradeoff, 
Space-time Code Design for Optimal Diversity-Multiplexing Tradeoff (7 Lectures) 
MIMO Multiuser Communication : Uplink with Multiple Recei ve Antennas, MIMO Uplink, 
Downlink with Multiple Transmit Antennas, MIMO Downlink, Multiple Antennas in 
Cellular Networks: A System View (9 Lectures) 
Massive MIMO networks : Large MIMO systems - Channel hardening and favorable 
propagation, channel estimation, precoding in large MIMO systems (12 Lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Tse, D. and Viswanath, P., (2005), Fundamentals of wireless communication , 
Cambridge University Press. 
2.  Chockalingam A. and Rajan B. S., (2014), Large MIMO Systems , Cambridge 
University Press. 
3.  Biglieri E., Calderbank R., Constantinides A., Paulraj A. and Poor H. V., (2007), 
MIMO Wireless Communications, Cambridge University Press. 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Zheng K.,  Zhao L., Mei J., Shao B., Xiang W. and Hanzo L., "Survey of Large-Scale 
MIMO Systems," in IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 
1738-1760, 2015. 
2. Wu Y., Xiao C., Ding Z., Gao X. and Jin S., "A Survey on MIMO Transmission With 
Finite Input Signals: Technical Challenges, Advances, and Future Trends," in 
Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 106, no. 10, pp. 1779-1833, Oct. 2018. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Details of Elective Courses 
 
Title Coding Theory Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. IV Year, M. Tech., Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Knowledge of Probability Theory and  Fundamentals of 
Communications 
  
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide an introduction to different types of channel codes. 
2. Familiarize students with the fundamentals of error detection and correction.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Design channel codes for error detection and correction. 
2. Analyze and compare the performance of uncoded and coded communication systems. 
 
Contents  
Introduction: Review of information theory, motivation for channel coding(3 Lectures) 
Introduction to Linear Algebra: Introduction to finite fields, field arithmetic, vector spaces(4 
Lectures) 
Linear Block Codes: Properties of LBCs, some specific LBCs (Repetition codes, Hamming codes, 
LDPC codes), soft decision decoding of LBCs, Hard decision decoding of LBCs, Bounds on 
minimum distance of LBCs(7 Lectures) 
Cyclic Codes: Definition and properties, polynomial representation, encoding and decoding of 
cyclic codes, burst error correction (7 Lectures) 
BCH and RS codes: Introduction to BCH Codes: Generator Polynomials, Multiple Error 
Correcting BCH Codes, Decoding of BCH Codes, Introduction to RS codes, Decoding RS  
codes(7 Lectures) 
Convolutional Codes: Structure of convolutional codes, decoding of convolutional codes, 
distance bounds for convolutional codes, punctured convolutional codes(7 Lectures)  
Trellis coded modulation : Introduction to TCM, Ungerboeck‟s TCM de sign rules, TCM decoder, 
performance evaluation of TCM schemes(7 Lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Lin, S. and Costello, D. J., (2004), Error Control Coding, 2nd Edition, Prentice Hall 
2. Proakis, J. G. and Salehi, M., (2007), Digital Communications, 5th Edition, McGraw-Hill 
3. Bose, R., (2017), Information Theory, Coding and Cryptography, 3rd Edition, McGraw-Hill 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Thangraj, A., Coding Theory, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical Engineering, 
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117106031/  
 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. Jagannatham, A. K., Principles of Communication II , Department of Electrical Engineering, 
Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108104098/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Title 
Antenna Engineering Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. IV Year, M. Tech., Ph.D.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite Electromagnetic Theory   
 
Objectives  
    The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce the various concept of antenna design. 
2. familiarize the students with the application of different type of antennas 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Design low profile antennas and high gain antenna arrays for practical applications 
2. Utilize simulation software for designing Antenna systems and test RF and 
microwave antennas 
 
Contents  
Introduction to Antennas : Radiation mechanism, Current distribution on a thin wire 
antenna, Review of Antenna Parameters; Friis Transmission formulae, Radar Range 
equation (7 Lectures) 
Radiation Integrals and Auxiliary Potential Function Vector potential for electric current 
source and magnetic current source, inhomogeneous vector potential wave equation, 
duality theorem, reciprocity theorem (3 Lectures) 
Design of Dipole Antenna Design of Infinitesimal dipole, small dipole, half -wavelength 
dipole (4 Lectures) 
Microstrip antenna Rect angular patch antenna, feeding methods, transmission line 
model, cavity model, Circular Patch Antenna  (4 Lectures) 
Low-profile Antenna Application : Mobile handset antenna - helical wire and variants; 
electrically small antenna; power factor, quality factor  and bandwidth; radiation 
efficiency and realized gain;  PIFA; On -chip antenna;  SAR measurement and 
miniaturization; GPS and Bluetooth antenna; medical application - antennas for medical 
imaging; heating; sensing; Automobile antennas - MAST antenna; Window glass 
antenna; Panel Antenna; (10 Lectures) 
Design of Antenna Arrays Analysis of Two element array, N -element linear array 
(uniform and nonuniform amplitude excitation: Binomial, Dolph -Tschebyscheff, Taylor 
distribution), planar array, Phased Array  (5 Lectures) 
Aperture Antenna Field equivalence principle, Radiation equation, Rectangular aperture, 
circular aperture, Babinet‟s principle, Sectoral horn antenna, Pyramidal Horn antenna  
(6 Lectures) 
Antenna Measurement Antenna Ranges, Radiation Pattern measure ment, Gain 
measurement (absolute gain method, gain comparison method), Directivity 
measurement  (3 Lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Balanis  C. A., (2016), Antenna Theory,  Analysis and Design , 4 th edition, Wiley 
Press 
2. Krauss  J. D., (2006), Antennas and Wave Propagation, 4th edition, TMH Education 
3.  Elliott  R. S., (2006), Antenna Theory and Design, Wiley Press 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Kumar, G., Antennas, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical Engineering, 
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay,   
https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc17_ee03/preview  
2.Ferraro, A., Antenna Engineering , Video Lectures, Penn State Univ., USA, 
http://www.engr.psu.edu/cde/courses/ee438/index.htm 
 
Preparatory Course Material  
1. Kumar, P., Electromagnetic Theory, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108104087/ 
2.  Kumar, G.,  Microwave Theory and Techniques,  Department of Electrical 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108101112/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Title Advanced Digital Communication Number EEL5XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. IV Year, M. Tech., Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Knowledge of Probability Theory and  
Fundaments of Communications 
  
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide strong theoretical foundation of digital communication modulation schemes 
and performance evaluation. 
2. Familiarize students with the fundamentals of communication through band limited 
channels and synchronization. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Design receivers for optimum performance. 
2. Analyze communication systems for their bit error performance.   
 
Contents  
Introduction: Complex baseband representation of signals, Gram -Schmidt 
orthogonalization procedure, M -ary orthogonal s ignals, bi -orthogonal signals, 
simplex signal waveforms(4 Lectures) 
Digital Modulation Schemes : Memoryless modulation schemes, signaling schemes with 
memory, power spectral density of digitally modulated signals(10 Lectures) 
Optimum receivers for AWGN chan nels: Coherent and non -coherent demodulation: 
Matched filter, Correlator demodulator, square -law, and envelope detection; 
Detector: Optimum rule for ML and MAP detection Performance: Bit -error-rate, 
symbol error rate for coherent and non-coherent schemes(14 Lectures) 
Carrier and Symbol Synchronization: carrier recovery and symbol synchronization in 
demodulation, carrier phase estimation, symbol timing estimation(4 Lectures) 
Digital Communication through Band Limited channels: signal design through band 
limited channels, Optimum receiver for channel with ISI and AWGN, Linear 
equalization, Decision -feedback equalization(10 Lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Proakis, J. G. and Salehi, M., (2007), Digital Communications, 5th Edition, McGraw-
Hill 
2. Madhow, U., (2008), Fundamentals of Digital Communication, 1st Edition, Cambridge 
University Press 
3. Barry, J. R., Lee, E. A., and Messerschmitt, D. G., (2004), Digital Communications, 
3rd Edition, Springer 
 
Preparatory Course Material  
1. Jagannatham, A. K., Principles of Communi cation II , Department of Electrical 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108104098/ 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Title Statistical Decision Theory  Number EEP7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 
Offered for B.Tech. IV Year, M. Tech., Ph.D. Type Elective   
Prerequisite Knowledge of Probability Theory and 
Fundamentals of Communications 
  
 
Objectives  
     The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide background to understand the fundamental aspects of decision making and 
hypothesis testing that are essential for communication receiver design 
 
Learning Outcomes  
     The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Apply the different methods for signal detection to real world engineering problems 
and advanced research 
2.  Garner useful insights into performance evaluation of communication systems 
 
Contents  
Introduction: structure of detection theory problems (1 Lecture) 
Simple Binary Hypothesis Testing:  decision criteria, Maximum Likelihood criterion, 
Neyman-Pearson criterion, Bayes risk, probability of error and min -max criterion, 
receiver operating characteristics, composite hypothesis testing (6 Lectures) 
M-ary Hypotheses or Multiple Decision Theory: multiple decisions, Bayes risk, 
probability of error, general Gaussian problem, performance bounds and 
approximations (14 Lectures) 
Detection of Continuous Time Signals: detection of signals in additive white Gaussian 
noise, detection in colored noise, sig nals with unwanted parameters (random phase, 
random amplitude and phase) (7 Lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Van Trees, H. L., (2003), Detection, Estimation and Modulation Theory: Part -1, 2nd 
Edition, John Wiley 
2.  Kay, S.M., (1998), Fundamentals of Statistical Signal Processing: Vol. 2 Detection 
Theory, 1st Edition, Prentice Hall 
 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Sinha, R., Signal Detection and Estimation Theory, NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Indian Institute of Technolo gy 
Guwahati, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117103018/ 
 
Preparatory Course Material  
1. Thangraj, A., Probability Foundations for Electrical Engineers , NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117103018/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Title Optimal Filtering Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. IV Year, M. Tech., Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Knowledge of Probability Theory and 
Fundamentals of  Communications 
  
 
Objectives 
     The Instructor will: 
1.  Help students understand the relationship between optimal filtering, linear 
estimation, and Wiener/Kalman filtering 
 
Learning Outcomes  
     The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Derive and manipulate the time discrete and time continuous Wiener and Kalman 
filter equations and compute the Wiener and Kalman filter for a given estimation 
problem. 
2.  Design optimal filters in the case of non-Gaussian noise or non-linear models. 
 
Contents  
Weiner Theory for scalar processes : continuous time Weiner smoothing, solution to 
Weiner Hopf equation, discrete time Weiner Hopf technique, recursive Weiner filtering, 
time-invariant state space models, recursive estimation given st ate-space models  (14 
Lectures) 
Kalman Filter: Derivation of the Kalman filter, Filter properties, Steady -state Kalman 
filter,    Prediction and smoothing, Kalman filter recursions, recursion for predicted and 
filtered state estimators (14 Lectures) 
Nonlinear Filtering : The extended Kalman filter, The Levenberg -Marquardt 
measurement update, Applications in navigation and signal processing (14 Lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Kamen and Su, J. K., (1999), Introduction to Optimal Estimation, Springer Verlag 
2.  Kailath, T., Sayed, A., and Hassibi, B., (2000), Linear Estimation, Prentice Hall 
 
 
 
Title Digital video processing  Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. IV Year, M. Tech., Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Fourier analysis   
Objectives 
     The Instructor will: 
1.  introduce foundations of image and video signal processing and highlight similarities 
and differences between the two 
2. Expose student to importance of motion in videos and its estimation, and use it for 
applications such as video compression, object tracking/recognition 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  meaningfully exploit the concept of spatio-temporal information in visual signals to 
develop applications in the broad area of multimedia signal processing 
Contents  
Motion analysis in video signals: Concepts of 2D motion, optical flow, block -based and 
pel-recursive methods for motion estimation, regularization techniques (8 lectures) 
Recent trends in video technologies: 
Stereo and multiview videos:introduction to depth perception and disparity estimat ion, 
view 
Synthesis, stereo and multiview display (14 lectures) 
HDR and Wide Color Gamut (WCG) videos: capture via exposure fusion, single HDR 
cameras,  
HDR display modeling, Standard -gamut versus wide color gamut, ITU -T BT.709 and 
BT.2020  
(10 lectures) 
HDR-HFR-UHD-WCG: dependencies from human visual system perspective, issue of 
viewing  
distance (6 lectures) 
360-degree videos: introduction to 360 -degree (omni directional) video capture and 
display,  
challenges in applying traditional 2D video processing techniques (4 lectures) 
 
 
Textbook  
1. Tekalp,M., (2015), Digital Video Processing, 2nd Edition, Prentice Hall 
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Katsaggelos, A.K., Fundamentals of Image and Video Processing , Coursera, 
Northwestern University, https://www.coursera.org/learn/digital 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. Jagannatham, A. K., Principles of Signals and Systems , NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108104100/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Title Optical Fiber Communications Number EEL6XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. (IV Year), M.Tech., Ph.D.   Type Elective 
Prerequisite EM Theory   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide the fundamental principles and the practices followed in the area of optical 
communications. 
2. Enable the appreciation of the global connectivity achieved via optical fiber 
technology. 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Design and implement an end -to-end fiber optic communication link  using 
commercially available LASERs, LEDs and Photodetectors. 
 
Contents  
(Fractal 1)Optical Fiber Waveguide: EEL6XX1 [1 -0-0]Introduction to :Vector 
Nature of Light, Optical Fiber – Single and Multimode, Step index and Graded Index 
Fibers, Ray and Wave picture of propagation, Cut -off, mode field diameter, group 
delay, Gaussian field approximation. (8 Lectures) 
Transmission Characteristics: The consequences of attenuation and dispersion in Optical 
Fibers: Material, Waveguide, Polarization, Intermodal and Intramodal Dispersion, 
Group velocity Dispersion, Dispersion modified single mode fibers. Fiber Fabrication 
Methods. (6 Lectures)  
(Fractal 2)Optical Sources and receivers: EEL6XX2 [1 -0-0] LASERS: Population 
inversion and feedback, Spontaneous and Stimulated emission, Injection LASERS, 
Gain and Index Guided LASERS, VSCELS, LASER Characteristics and Driver Circuits, 
Fiber Coupling. LED: Structure, Characteristics and Driver Circuits. (7 Lectures) 
Optical Receivers: Photo-detectors – PN, P -I-N, Avalanche Photodiodes, 
Phototransistors, Responsivity, Quantum Efficiency, Noise, Optical Receiver 
structures: Low, high and transimpedance front end, Low noise Preamplifiers. (7 
Lectures) 
(Fractal 3)Op tical Fiber Link Design : EEL6XX3 [1 -0-0]Fiber joints, connectors, 
couplers and isolators, Splicing operation, System Planning considerations, quantum 
limit, SNR, BER calculation, Rise time budgeting, Power budgeting, Choice of 
components, Principles of Coh erent and Incoherent Optical communication systems. 
(8 Lectures) 
Introduction to Nonlinear effects : Impact of SPM, XPM, FWM on communication 
systems, Raman and Brillioun Scattering and solition based communication. (4 
Lectures)  
Miscellaneous:  EDFA, Raman amplifier, and WDM and SDM systems. (2 Lectures) 
Textbooks  
1. J. M. Senior, Optical Fiber Communications: Principles and Practice, Prentice 
Hall, 3rd Edition, 2010.  
2. G. Keiser, Fibre Optic Communication McGraw-Hill, 5th Edition. 2013. 
3. G. Agrawal, Fiber optic Communication Systems, John Wiley and sons, 4th 
Edition 2010. 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. NPTEL Lectures on Advanced Optical Communication by Prof. R.K. Shevgaonkar, 
IIT Bombay(https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117101002/) 
2. The RP Photonics Encyclopedia (https://www.rp-
photonics.com/encyclopedia.html) 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. (Fractal 1) Some concepts from “M.O. Sadiku and S.V. Kulkarni, Principles of 
Electromagnetics”, Oxford University Press, 6th edition, 2015. 
2. (Fractal 2) Some Concepts from “Jacob Millman et.al., Integrated Electronics”, 
McGraw Hill Education, 2nd Edition, 2017.  
3. (Fractal 3) Some concepts from “B.P. Lathi and Z. Ding, Modern Digital and 
Analog Communication Systems”, Oxford University Press, 4th Edition, 2011 
 
 
  
 
Title Digital image processing and applications Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. IV Year, M. Tech., Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Fourier analysis   
 
Objectives 
     The Instructor will: 
1. introduce basic concepts in image signal capture and display 
2. provide an in-depth coverage of few recent applications of digital image processing 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  implement end-to-end systems that can capture, process and render a digital image in a 
desired fashion  
 
Contents  
Introduction:basic concepts of image signal capture, relation of pixels to physical luminance (3  
 lectures) 
Display modeling: concept of dynamic range, color correction, modeling of a conventional  
display, modeling of modern Led-backlit displays, applications (6 lectures) 
Image processing and Machine Learning:similarities and differences between traditional and  
ML based models, augmenting traditional image processing with ML (6 lectures) 
Sparse models for image processing: dictionary learning, modeling of natural image patches,  
applications of sparse modeling (denoising, inpainting, super resolution) (7 lectures) 
Image inpainting: use-case scenarios, analytical methods (PDE, SVD, dictionary learning etc.)  
for inpainting, exemplar-based inpainting, content-aware filling in Adobe Photoshop CS5,  
semantic inpainting using machine learning (10 lectures) 
Image saliency: bottom-up and top-down mechanisms, saliency due to color and texture,  
automatic saliency prediction using traditional and ML based approaches, applications of  
saliency (6 lectures) 
 
Perceptual image processing: masking, contrast sensitivity, angular frequency and viewing  
Distance (4 lectures)  
 
Textbook  
1. Gonzalez, R.C. and Woods, R.E., (2018), Digital Image Processing, 4th Edition, Prentice Hall 
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Katsaggelos, A.K., Fundamentals of Image and Video Processing , Coursera, Northwestern 
University, https://www.coursera.org/learn/digital 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. Rao, R. V., Advanced Matrix Theory and Linear Algebra For Engineers , NPTEL Course 
Material, Centre for Electronics Design and Technology, Indian Institute of Science, 
Bangalore, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111108066/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Title Multirate Digital Signal Processing Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 
Offered for B.Tech. IV Year, M. Tech., Ph.D. Type Elective  
Prerequisite Digital Signal Processing   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide the concept of multirate signal processing and demonstrate the ability to 
solve the problems in sample rate conversion, filter banks and Transmultiplexers 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the basic concepts of multirate systems; understanding of decimation, 
interpolation and filterbanks  
2. Understand the realizations for upsampling and downsampling of signals using 
polyphaser decomposition 
3. design the filter banks based on the techniques discussed in the class 
 
Contents  
Review of Digital Filters, Multirate Systems (3 Lectures) 
Interconnection of Multirate DSP blocks, Multiplexer and demultiplexer functionality (4 
Lectures) 
Application of Multirate DSP: DFT- based filterbanks, Transmultiplexer, Filterbank 
Interpretation of Spectral Analysis using DFT, Two channel maximally decimated filter 
banks (6 Lectures) 
Introduction to OFDM (5 lectures) 
Multicarrier modulation, Block transceivers with redundancy, Zero-padding, cyclic prefx, 
OFDM, extensions of OFDM including Filterbank Multicarrier (FBMC) (6 lectures) 
Application of Multirate DSP: Delta Sigma A/D conversion (4 lectures) 
Textbook  
1.  Vaidyanathan, P. P., (2008), Multirate Systems and Filter Banks, Pearson Education 
2. Harris, F. J., (2007), Multirate Signal Processing for Communication Systems , 1 st 
Edition, Pearson Education 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Kovilpillai D., Multirate Digital Signal Processing, NPTEL Course Material, Department 
of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Chennai, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108106136/ 
 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. Dutta, S. C. R., Digital Signal Processing , NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Techno logy Delhi, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117102060/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Title Network Information Theory Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.-Ph.D. Dual Degree (Comm. Engg.) Type Elective  
Prerequisite Wireless Communications   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide fundamental concepts in multi -user and network information theory with 
applications in communications 
2. Expose students to the fundamentals of the multiple access channel, broadcast 
channel, channels with state, interference channel, relay channel, network coding 
and MIMO multiuser channels. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  the core ideas of network information theory, including key multi -user coding 
techniques, proof ideas and performance analysis in modern communications 
networks 
 
Contents  
Review of basic information theory concepts: entropy, mutual information (3 lectures) 
Multiple access channel: capacity, successive interference cancellation (4 lectures) 
Gaussian Degraded Broadcast Channels:  Discrete Memoryless Broadcast Channel, 
Simple Bounds on the Capacity Region, Superposition Coding Inner Bound, Degraded 
DM-BC, Gaussian Broadcast Channel (7 lectures) 
Channels with state:  DMC with state , Compound Channel, Arbitrarily Varying Channel, 
Channels with Random State, Causal State Information Available at the Encoder, Non -
causal State Information Available at the Encoder, dirty-paper coding (7 lectures) 
Interference channel:  Discrete Memoryless  Interference Channel, Simple Coding 
Schemes, Strong Interference, Gaussian Interference Channel, Han -Kobayashi Inner 
Bound, Capacity Region of the Gaussian IC within Half a Bit (7 lectures) 
Relay channel:  Cut-set Upper Bound on the Capacity, Direct -Transmission Lower 
Bound, Decode –Forward Lower Bound, Gaussian Relay Channel, Compress –Forward 
Lower Bound, Receiver Frequency Division Gaussian Relay Channel, Look -ahead Relay 
Channels (7 lectures) 
Multicast and interference networks:  network coding, noisy netw ork coding, 
interference alignment. (7 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Gamal A. E. and Kim Y. H., (2012), Network Information Theory , Cambridge 
University Press. 
2.  Kramer G., (2008), Topics in multi-user information theory, now Publishers Inc. 
3.  Cover T. and Thomas J., (2006), Element of Information Theory, Wiley-Interscience. 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Avestimehr A. S., Diggavi S.N. and Tse D. N. C., "Wireless Network Information 
Flow: A Deterministic Approach," IEEE Transactions on Informat ion Theory, Vol. 57, 
No. 4, pp.1872-1905, 2011. 
2. Dimakis A. G., Godfrey P. B., Wu Y., Wainwright M. J. and Ramchandran K., 
"Network Coding for Distributed Storage Systems," IEEE Transactions on 
Information Theory, Vol. 56, No. 9, pp. 4539 - 4551, 2010. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Title Radio Frequency Integrated Circuit Design Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. (IV Year), M.Tech, and PhD  Type Elective 
Prerequisite Analog electronics, Fundamentals of 
Communication engineering and EM Theory 
  
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce students to the integrated circuit designing at radio frequencies. 
2. Introduce various circuits and building blocks for communication applications. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the design of integrated circuits at high frequencies. 
2. Practically implement various circuits required to build a transceiver system. 
3. Learn about the design of various active components like mixers, LNAs, power 
amplifiers at RF and microwave frequencies. 
 
Contents  
Communication System Overview :Modulation, Mobile Systems, Multiple Access 
Techniques, Wireless Standards. (2 lectures) 
Noise:Noise spectrum, device noise, noise in a circuit, effect of noise on transfer  
function. (4 lectures) 
Transceiver Architectures: Heterodyne Receivers, Direct -Conversion Receivers, Image 
Reject and Low IF Receivers, Transmitter Architectures. (4 lectures) 
Concepts of RF Design: Wave Guides and Transmission Lines, coupled lines, S -
Parameters, Smith Chart, single and double stub impedance matching, Two -port gain 
and stability analysis. (10 lectures) 
Amplifier Design: Concepts of nonlinearity, time variance and IIP3, model of MOS 
transistors and BJT at high frequencies, wideband amplifiers,  constant gain amplifier, 
constant noise figure amplifier, low noise amplifier, power amplifiers, combining 
networks. (9 lectures) 
Oscillators and Voltage Controlled Oscillators:  Basic topologies VCO and definition of 
phase noise. Noise -power trade -off, quadrature and single -sideband generators. (5 
lectures) 
Mixers: Mixer Noise figure, port to port feed -through, single -balanced and double 
balanced mixers. (4 lectures) 
Introduction to Phase -Locked Loops: Type I and Type II PLL‟s, PLL Non -idealities. (4 
lectures) 
 
Textbook 
1. Lee, T. H., (1997), The Design of CMOS Radio -Frequency Integrated Circuits , 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press 
2. Razavi, B., (2014), RF Microelectronics, 2nd Edition, Pearson Education 
 
3. Gonzalez, G., (1996), Microwave Transistor Amplifiers: Analysis and Design , 2 nd 
edition, Pearson 
 
Self-Learning Materials  
1. Chatterjee, S., RF Integrated Circuits , NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, IIT Delhi, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/117102012/# 
2. High Speed Communication Circuits, MIT, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical -
engineering-and-computer-science/6-776-high-speed-communication-circuits-
spring-2005/lecture-notes/ 
 
Preparatory Course Materials 
1. Lathi, B. P., and Ding, Z., (2017), Modern Digital and Analog Communications 
Systems, 4th edition, Oxford university press 
2. Pozar, D. M., (2011), Microwave Engineering, 4th edition, New York, NY, USA: Wiley 
 
 
  
Title Adaptive Signal Processing Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. (IV Year), M.Tech., Ph.D Type Elective  
Prerequisite Digital Signal Processing   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide students an understanding of fundamental issues related to adjustment of weights 
of processing filters based on requirement and signal characteristics. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Design various optimal filters such as Least Squares filters and its variants. 
2.  Apply the adaptive filtering techniques in various application areas such as speech, image, 
and video processing. 
 
Contents  
Introduction: Applications of Adaptive Signal Processing (1 Lecture) 
Review of linear and non-linear estimation theory: Properties of estimators, estimators of 
mean and variance, least square estimation, loss function, weighted least squares (6 lectures)  
Signal modelling, Optimal filtering, Adaptive filtering as an extension of the optimal least mean 
square error case Adaptive algorithms: Linear non-parametric signal models, parametric pole-
zero signal models, optimum signal estimation, linear mean square error estimation, optimum 
FIR and IIR response filters, derivation of LMS algorithm, convergence of weight vector, 
recursive least square adaptive filters, RLS algorithm (15 lectures) 
Adaptive equalization and echo cancellation:  structures and adaptive algorithms, double talk 
detection, Howling suppression, stereophonic acoustic echo cancellation (5 lectures) 
Adaptive lattice filters: Forward and backward linear prediction, derivation of lattice structure, 
lattice joint process estimator, autoregressive modeling, gradient adaptive lattice, RLS 
adaptive lattice, RLS lattice recursions  (10 lectures) 
Application to image processing, video processing, and communications (spread spectrum 
techniques) (5 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Haykin, S., (1986), Adaptive filter theory, Prentice Hall 
2. Widrow, B. and Stearns, S. D., (1984), Adaptive Signal Processing, Prentice Hall 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Chakraborty M., Adaptive Signal Processing , NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117105075/ 
 
Preparatory Course Material  
1. Dutta Roy, S. C., Digital Signal Processing, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117102060/  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Title Image sensor Design and Applications Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech IV year, M. Tech, Ph. D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Analog electronics   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Introduce the design and analysis of CMOS image sensors.  
2.  Explain the readout electronics behind the camera. 
3. Provide the knowledge of performance measures and tradeoffs involved in the camera 
design. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Design and develop CMOS image sensor including the sensing mechanism and signal chain    
     of the camera. 
2.  Implement different techniques required for high dynamic range camera, high frame rate,  
     low noise camera, time of flight 3D cameras etc. 
 
Contents  
Introduction to photodetectors: Photodiode and photogate, photocurrent, dark current, 
quantum efficiency, spectral response and photo-conversion principles (5 Lectures). 
Introduction to Charge coupled devices and CMOS imag e sensors:  Operation, performance 
metrics, noise and its types, spatial resolution and modulation transfer function.  Concept of 
exposure triangle including aperture, shutter speed and ISO, color filters, Bayer pattern, 
Shutters and its types, motion blur,  hard and soft reset, Introduction to imaging optics (8 
Lectures). 
Readout electronics and image sensor characterization: Readout and its types, design tradeoffs 
and challenges, analysis of the signal path behind the camera, variable gain amplifiers, double  
sampling circuits,  ADCs, reference and clock generation circuits, floor planning, placement and 
routing, image sensor characterization (15 Lectures). 
Emerging trends :High speed cameras, high dynamic range cameras, 3D cameras for 
background light subtract ion and depth estimation. Concepts of Polarization imaging, low light 
imaging, machine vision, backside illumination, stacked technology, target tracking (10 
Lectures).  
Color Processing: Color demosaicing, color correction and white balance (2 Lectures). 
Applications:Smart city, health care, autonomous vehicles, sports, motion detection, 
surveillance (2 Lectures). 
 
Textbook  
1. Ohta, J., (2007), Smart CMOS Image sensors and Applications, CRC press. 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. O. Y. Pecht, and Cummings, R. E., (2004), CMOS imagers: From Photo transduction to 
Image processing. 
2. Albert J.P. Theuwissen, Harvest imaging, https://harvestimaging.com/ 
3. Albert J.P. Theuwissen, Image sensors blog http://image-sensors-world.blogspot.com/ 
 
Preparatory Course Material  
1. IEEE Journal of Solid State circuits 
   
 
 
 
 
  
Title Digital image and video processing lab Number EEP7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 1–0–2 [2] 
Offered for B.Tech. IV Year, M. Tech., Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Fourier analysis   
 
Objectives 
     The Instructor will: 
1. introduce student to importance of motion in videos and motion estimation 
techniques 
2. discuss applications such as display modeling, video compression, and visual 
attention modeling 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  implement models for that affect visual signal display and perception 
2.  meaningfully exploit the concept of spatio -temporal information in videos to develop 
applications in the broad area of multimedia signal processing 
Contents  
Introduction:basic concepts of visual signal capture (both images and videos), relation 
of pixels to physical luminance (1 lecture) 
Display modeling:  concept of dynamic range, color correction, modeling of a 
conventional display (gamma correction, Weber law), HDR display model (3 
lectures) 
Motion estimation in video signals: Concepts of 2D motion, and introduction to 
techniques such as optical flow, block-based and pel-recursive methods (2 lectures) 
Video compression: introduction to video coding standards (MPEG, H.26x), and their 
implementation (4 lectures) 
Depth Image based Rendering:  view synthesis and modeling, aspects of perceptual 
quality (2 lectures) 
Visual saliency modeling: introduction to visual attention in both 2D and omnidirectional 
(360-degree) content and basic models (2 lectures) 
Lab experiments: for each topic students will implement the corresponding models and 
examine the performance through standard metrics (~14 lab experiments) 
 
 
 
Textbook  
1. Tekalp,M., (2015), Digital Video Processing, 2nd Edition, Prentice Hall 
2. Bovik, A., (2009), The Essential Guide to Video Processing, 1 st Edition, Academic 
Press 
3. Woods,J.W., (2006), Multidimensional Signal, Image and Video Processing and 
Coding, 2nd Edition, Academic Press  
4. Wang, Yao, (2003), Video Processing and Communications, 2nd Edition, Prentice Hall 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Gupta, S., Digital Video Signal Processing , NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117104020/ 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. Jagannatham, A. K., Principles of Signals and Systems , NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108104100/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Title Radio Frequency Integrated Circuit Design 
Lab 
Number EEP7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 1–0–2[2] 
Offered for B.Tech. (IV Year) , M.Tech and PhD  Type Elective 
Prerequisite Analog Electronics, EM Theory   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce the students to RF integrated circuit design and measurements. 
2. Introduce the students to various circuits required for communication applications. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
     The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Design RF circuits using softwares like ADS, HFSS. 
2. Design of integrated circuits at RF-Microwave frequencies. 
3. Implement various circuits required to build a transceiver. 
 
Contents 
1. Introduction to ADS and HFSS RF simulators. 
2. Calibration Network Analyzers (SOLT and TRL) / Use of Spectrum Analyzer/Tools 
and Tips for RF PCB design. 
3. Characterization of passive components at RF-Microwave frequencies. 
4. Design and Measurement of power combining/dividing networks. 
5. Measurement of RF Amplifier. 
6. Distortion Measurements. 
7. Noise Measurements.  
8. Phase Noise Measurement. 
9. Measurement of Mixers.  
10. Load/Source Pull Measurement for large signal characterization. 
 
Textbook 
1. Lee, T. H., (1997), The Design of CMOS Radio -Frequency Integrated Circuits , 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press 
2. Razavi, B., (2014), RF Microelectronics, 2nd Edition, Pearson Education 
3. Niknejad, A. M., (2007), Electromagnetics for High -Speed Analog and Digital 
Communication Circuits, Cambridge University Press 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. High Speed Communication Circuits, MIT, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-
engineering-and-computer-science/6-776-high-speed-communication-circuits-
spring-2005/lecture-notes/ 
2. Aniruddhan, S., RF Integrated Circuits, Department of Electrical Engineering,  Indian 
Institute of Technology Madras,  
http://www.ee.iitm.ac.in/videolectures/doku.php?id=ee6240_2013:start 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
1.  Pozar, D. M., (2011), Microwave Engineering, 4th Edition, New York, NY, USA: Wiley 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Title Machine Learning for Communications  Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. IV Year, M. Tech., Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Fundamentals of communication systems, 
machine learning 1 
  
 
Objectives 
     The Instructor will: 
1.  Introduce the area of machine learning in the context of communications   
2. Discuss scenarios in the domain of communications where machine learning can  be 
a viable alternative to traditional approaches 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Apply machine learning techniques (supervised/unsupervised classification and 
regression) for specific problems in the domain of communications 
Contents  
Review of machine learning techniques as applicable in the area of communications (3 
lectures) 
Why and when machine learning can be useful in communication? (2 lectures) 
Overview of machine learning in communications (2 lectures) 
Machine learning for physical layer design: Adaptive modulation and coding (AMC), 
classical AMC, AMC using support vector machines, k-nearest neighbors, reinforcement 
learning (5 lectures) 
Channel prediction: prediction of wireless channel features via neural networks, channel 
prediction using Recurrent neural networks (3 lectures) 
Video communication: introduction to video coding standards (MPEG, H.26x), discussion 
of traditional algorithms (motion compensation, line ar prediction etc.), modern 
approaches for video compression using machine learning (8 lectures) 
Machine learning for mobile network design:  network state prediction, traffic prediction 
and interference management, small cell clustering in Hetnet, u ser grouping/clustering 
in D2D, HetNets for offloading, modeling spatio -temporal correlations in geographical 
mobile traffic measurements using CNNs/RNNs (10 lectures) 
User mobility analysis: modeling spatial dependencies in sequential data (3 lectures) 
Learning based automatic modulation recognition in cognitive radios (2 lectures) 
Possible limitations of machine learning methods in communication systems (3 lectures)  
Textbook  
1. Bishop, C. M., (2007), Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, Springer 
2. MacKay, D.J.C., (2005), Information Theory, Inference, and Learning Algorithms, 
Cambridge University Press 
 
Self-Learning Material  
Machine Learning For Communications Emerging Technologies Initiative, IEEE 
https://mlc.committees.comsoc.org/research-library/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Title Machine Learning for Communication lab Number EEP7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 1–0–2 [2] 
Offered for B.Tech. IV Year, M. Tech., Ph.D.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite Machine learning 1   
 
Objectives 
     The Instructor will 
1. Introduce students to scenarios in which machine learning methods can be applied  
2. Provide students problems in the domain of communications  and signal processing 
where machine learning can  be a viable alternative to traditional approaches 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Apply machine learning techniques (supervised/unsupervised classification and 
regression) for specific problems in the domain of communications and signal 
processing 
 
Contents  
Why and when machine learning can be useful in communication and signal processing? 
(1 lecture) 
User mobility analysis: modeling spatial dependencies in sequential data (2 lectures) 
Visual communication syste ms: application of machine learning for video compression 
(2 lectures) 
Machine learning for video quality prediction (3 lectures) 
Learning based automatic modulation recognition in cognitive radios (2 lectures) 
Smart wireless network management using machine learning (2 lectures) 
Possible limitations of machine learning methods in communication systems (2 lectures) 
Textbook  
1. Bishop, C. M., (2007), Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, Springer 
2. MacKay, D.J.C., (2005), Information Theory, Inference, and Learning Algorithms, 
Cambridge University Press 
 
Self Learning Material  
Machine Learning For Communications Emerging Technologies Initiative, IEEE 
https://mlc.committees.comsoc.org/research-library/ 
 
Title GNSS Signal Processing Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech., M. Tech., Ph. D.  Type Elective  
Prerequisite Fundamentals of Communications and Signals 
and Systems 
  
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Describe and analyze the signal processing of a GNSS receiver, including signal 
acquisition, tracking and navigation. 
2. Expose students to the main vulnerabilities and limitations of GNSS technology, 
including interference sources such as jamming, unintentional interferences, 
spoofing and ionospheric scintillation. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Understand the basic principles and signal processing tools that are used in satellite -
based navigation for signal acquisition and computation of positioning solutions. 
2.  Analyze the state of the art signal acquisition methods and countermeasures 
strategies for interference and spoofing. Interpret anti -jamming techniques in the 
context of robust signal processing theory. 
 
Contents  
Course introduction: positioning is everywhere; GNSS is a key technology; main GNSS 
components; GNSS limitations; review of mathematical tools. (3 lectures) 
Fundamentals of satellite -based navigation:  historical remarks on navigation; 
positioning concepts; system segment s; space segment; ground segment; user 
segment. (4 lectures) 
GNSS signals in space:  overview of the main signal characteristics: GPS, Galileo, 
GLONASS, Beidou, IRNSS; focus on IRNSS SPS and RS signal; BPSK vs BOC 
modulations. (3 lectures) 
GNSS channel mode l: propagation delay; Doppler effect; multipath and non -line-of-
sight; ionospheric and tropospheric delays. (4 lectures) 
GNSS receiver:  antenna and RF front -end; signal sampling; signal acquisition as a 
detection problem; signal tracking as a filtering pro blem; observables‟ computation. (7 
lectures) 
 
Navigation solution: Code-based positioning; Code  and carrier -based positioning; least 
squares solution; weighted least squares solution; Kalman filtering solution; basic 
schemes for GNSS/inertial hybridization. (7 lectures) 
Vulnerabilities of GNSS:  intentional interferences and jammers; unintentional 
interferences; spoofing attacks; ionospheric scintillation; detection and mitigation 
techniques. (7 lectures) 
Indoor positioning:  basic measurements; positioning approaches: model -based versus 
model-free methods; hybridization and data fusion; main technologies. (7 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Betz J. W., (2015), Engineering Satellite -Based Navigation and Timing: Global 
Navigation Satellite Systems, Signals, and Receivers, Wiley-IEEE Press. 
2.  Kaplan E. and Hegarty C. J., (2017), Understanding GPS/GNSS: Principles and 
Applications, Artech House. 
3. Misra P. and Enge P., (2011), Global Positioning System: Signals, Measurements, 
and    Performance, Ganga-Jamuna Press. 
 
Preparatory Course Material  
1. Zheng, L. and Gallager, R., Principles of Digital Communications I , MIT 
OpenCourseWare, Electrical Engineering & Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical -engineering-and-computer-
science/6-450-principles-of-digital-communications-i-fall-2006/ 
 
 
  
Title Free Space Optical Communications Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech IV Year, M.Tech. and Ph.D Type Elective 
Prerequisite Fundamentals of probability, wireless and optical 
communications 
  
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Give a comprehensive introduction of the fundamentals of Free Space Optical (FSO) 
communications. 
2. Help students understand the techniques to improve the performance of FSO 
communication systems.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Ability to analyze FSO system performance under various channel impairments. 
2. Ability to design and simulate efficient FSO links by utilizing the knowledge of 
mitigation techniques which could be used advanced research. 
 
Contents  
Fundamentals of Free Space Optical (FSO) communication systems: Motivation, 
advantages, limitations, applications (3 Lectures) 
FSO components: FSO transmitter and receiver structures, optical sources, optical 
amplifiers, photodetectors, photodetection techniques (4 Lectures) 
FSO channel and noise modeling: Different losses in FSO systems, atmospheric 
turbulence models, pointing errors, noise sources, background radiation (7 Lectures) 
Modulation schemes: Subcarrier intensity modulation, on -off keying, M -ary pulse 
position modulation (M -PPM), differential PPM, differential amplitude pulse -position 
modulation digital pulse interval modulation (6 Lectures) 
Performance analysis of FSO systems: BER evaluation of different modulation schemes 
under atmospheric turbulence and pointing errors, information theoretic limits of 
FSO systems, asymptotic behavior (8 Lectures) 
Mitigation techniques for improved FSO performance: Aperture averaging, diversity    
techniques and MIMO FSO, adaptive optics techniques (10 Lectures) 
Miscellaneous: Physical layer security in FSO (4 Lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Ghassemlooy, Z., Popoola, W., and Rajbhandari, S., (2019), Optical Wireless 
Communications: System and Channel Modelling with MATLAB® , 2 nd Edition, CRC 
Press 
2. Djordjevic, I. B., (2018), Advanced Optical and Wireless Communications Systems , 
1st Edition, Springer 
3. Majumdar, A. K., (2015), Advanced Free Space Optics - A System Approach , 1 st 
Edition, Springer  
 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. Kumar, P. K., Optical Communications, Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian 
Institute of Technology Kanpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117104127/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Title Real Time Communications Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech., M. Tech. and Ph. D.  Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Introduce QoS and design criteria for real time communication for wired and 
wireless networks. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Design protocols and links for real time communication over wired and wireless 
networks. 
 
Contents  
Introduction: Type of network, Quality of Service, Traffic Categorization (4 Lectures) 
Real-Time Communication in Wired Networks:  RTC in LAN, Soft and Hard read time 
communication, RTC over internet, Routing, resource rese rvation, traffic shaping and 
policing, scheduling, Real -Time Communication Via Ethernet in Industrial Automation 
Environments (14 Lectures) 
Real-Time Communication in Packet -Switched Networks: Real-Time Scheduling Theory, 
Traffic Characterization, Connecti on-Level Processing, Per -Packet Processing, 
Scheduler-based Methods, Application -level Characteristics, Connection -level Issues (7 
Lectures) 
Real-Time Communication over Unreliable Wireless Links:  A necessary and sufficient 
condition for feasibility, Utili ty maximization, broadcasting real -time flows with network 
coding and xor coding (7 Lectures) 
Real-time communication protocols:  Token-ring networks, Broadcast networks, Other 
networks, Real -time support in the higher layers, Blink protocol for Real -Time 
Communication for Wireless Cyber-Physical Systems (10 Lectures) 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Mall R., Real-time Systems , NPTEL Course Material, Computer Science and 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106105086/6 
 
2. Decotignie J. -D., Ethernet Based Real -Time and Industrial Communications, Proc. of 
the IEEE, vol. 93, issue 6, pp.  1102-17, 2005. 
3.  Hou I. and Kumar P. R.,  "Real-time communication over unreliable wireless links: a 
theory and its applications," in IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 
48-59, 2012. 
4.  Hanssen F., & Jansen P.G., (2003), Real-time communication protocols: an 
overview. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Title Backhaul Networks for Wireless 
Systems 
Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech., M. Tech. and Ph. D.  Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Introduce the communication backhaul networks for future wireless systems. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Understand concepts such as caching, mmWave backhauling, channel aggregation and 
perform analysis and optimization of backhaul technologies. 
 
Contents  
Introduction: Backhaul networks - Wired solutions, Wireless solutions; The Communication Haul 
Challenge, Evolution of Backhaul networks -  LTE mobile backhaul, Multi -RAT and multi -operator 
backhaul, LTE-A backhaul, Future RAN and backhaul evolution (3 lectures) 
Spectral coexistence for next generation wireless backhaul networks:  Research trends in wireless 
backhaul, Hybrid satellite-terrestrial backhaul, Case studies, Future recommendations (4 lectures) 
Control data separation and its implications on backhaul networks:   RAN design in legacy 
standards,  5G RAN with control/data separation,  Main challenge for backhaul networks (7 
lectures) 
Backhaul relaxation through caching:  Background on content caching, Caching in 5G wireless 
systems, Energy efficiency and caching in 5G systems (5 lectures) 
Backhauling 5G Small Cells with Massive ‐MIMO‐Enabled mmWave Communication:  mmWave 
Communication, mmWave Backhauling, Research Challenges for Backhauling in 5G Networks, 
Massive‐MIMO‐based mmWave Backhauling System (12 lectures) 
Analysis and Optimization for Heterogeneous Backhaul Technologies:  Backhaul Model, Backhaul 
Packet Delay Analysis, Backhaul Deployment Cost Analysis, Backhaul ‐aware BS Association Policy 
(5 lectures) 
Multiband and Multichannel  Aggregation for High ‐speed Wireless Backhaul:  Challenges and 
Solutions, Multiband and Multichannel Aggregation, Spectrally Efficient Channel Aggregation, 
Practical System Examples (6 lectures) 
 
 
Textbook  
1. Saidul Huq K. M. and Rodriguez J., (2016), Backhauling / Fronthauling for Future Wireless 
Systems, Wiley-Blackwell. 
2. Imran M. A., Zaidi S. A. R., and Shakir M. Z., Access, (2017), Fronthaul and Backhaul Networks 
for 5G & Beyond, IET Press. 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. IEEE Best Readings in Backhau l and Fronthaul: Communications, Networking, and Signal 
Processing https://www.comsoc.org/publications/best-readings/backhaul-and-fronthaul-
communications-networking-and-signal-processing 
2.ETSI 5G WirelessBackhaul/X-Haul, 
https://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_gr/mWT/001_099/012/01.01.01_60/gr_mWT012v010101p.
pdf 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Title Applied Optimization for Wireless 
Communication 
Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech., M. Tech. and Ph. D.  Type Elective  
Prerequisite Basic knowledge of - Calculus, Probability, 
Matrices 
  
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Expose students to the fundamental tools and techniques in modern optimization. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Apply Convex Optimization techniques to various aspects of wireless communication 
systems.  
 
Contents  
Introduction to properties of Vectors, Norms, Positive Semi -Definite, matrices, Gaussian 
Random Vectors (6 Lectures) 
Introduction to Convex Optimiza tion, Convex sets, Hyperplanes Half -spaces etc. 
Application: Power constraints in Wireless Systems (6 Lectures) 
Convex Concave Functions, Examples, Conditions for Convexity. Application: 
Beamforming in Wireless Systems, Multi -User Wireless, Cognitive Radio  Systems (6 
Lectures) 
Convex Optimization problems, Linear Program, Application: Power allocation in Multi -
cell cooperative OFDM 
QCQP, SOCP Problems, Application: Channel shortening for Wireless Equalization, 
Robust Beamforming in Wireless Systems (8 Lectures) 
Duality Principle and KKT Framework for Optimization. Application: Water -filling power 
allocation, Optimization for MIMO Systems, OFDM Systems and MIMO-OFDM systems (7 
Lectures) 
Optimization for signal estimation, LS, WLS, Regularization. Application:  Wireless 
channel estimation (2 Lectures) 
Application: Cooperative Communication, Optimal Power Allocation for cooperative, 
Communication (2 Lectures) 
Application: Radar for target detection, Array Processing, MUSIC, MIMO -Radar Schemes 
for Enhanced Target Detection (2 Lectures) 
Application: Autonomous self-organization in dynamic wireless networks (3 Lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Boyd S. P. and Vandenberghe L., (2004), Convex Optimization , Cambridge 
University Press. 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Jagannatham A., Applied Optimization for Wireless, Machine Learning, Big Data , 
NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of 
Technology Kanpur, https://nptel.ac.in/noc/individual_course.php?id=noc18-ee31 
2.  Llorca J., Milner S. D. and  Davis C. C., "A convex optimization method for 
autonomous self-organization in dynamic wireless networks," MILCOM 2008 - 2008 
IEEE Military Communications Conference, San Diego, CA, pp. 1-8, 2008. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Title Millimeter-wave Technology Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. (IV Year), M.Tech, and PhD  Type Elective 
Prerequisite Electromagnetic theory   
 
Objectives  
     The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce the students with the phenomenon and circuit characteristics at mm-wave 
frequency ranges. 
2. Familiarize students with various guiding structures, antennas, and switches at mm -
wave frequencies. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the design problems and challenges at mm-wave frequencies. 
2. Have the knowledge about the various mm -wave guiding structures, switches, and 
antennas. 
 
Contents  
 
Introduction to millimeter -wave technology :mm-wave frequency bands, atmospheric 
losses, application of mm -waves, Propagation and path losses, Friis equation, link 
budget and power budget calculation. (4 lectures) 
Novel Guiding structures for mmwave circuits:  losses in planar circuits (conductor loss, 
leakage loss, dielectric loss, surface waves), Air filled waveguide s, dielectric guides, 
NRD guide, substrate integrated waveguides (SIW), Substrate Integrated NRD (SINRD), 
Gap Waveguide, dielectric image line, planar air filled waveguide, Waveguide and planar 
resonators, Dielectric resonators, loaded, unloaded, and exter nal Q-factors, SPST and 
SPDT switches. (8 lectures) 
Beam-forming network: Introduction to mmwave circuits: hybrid coupler, crossover, 
phase shifter, butler matrix, nolen matrix, Rotman lens. (5 lectures)  
Millimeter wave antennas: Problem with traditional an tennas, horn antenna, dielectric 
rod antenna, Leaky wave antenna, waveguide slot array, chain antenna array, on chip 
antennas, monopulse radar network, transmitarray, reflectarray, millimeterwave over 
the air (OTA) measurement testing: Total Radiated Power  (TRP), Total Isotropic 
Sensitivity (TIS), Effective Isotropic Radiated Power (EIRP), Effective Isotropic 
Sensitivity (EIS). (10 lectures) 
Packaging and interconnects: Challenges in packaging, design of interconnects at mm -
wave frequencies, bondwire interconnections, ball-grid array. (3 lectures) 
Millimeterwave Active circuits: mmwave CMOS circuits: LNA,Oscillator, VCO, Power 
Amplifier, Frequency Synthesizer, SoC for mmwave RADAR, FinFET (10 Lectures) 
Case Studies: mmwave transciever for 5G, industrial radar sensor (2 lectures) 
 
Textbook 
1. Koul, S.K., (1997), Millimeter Wave and Optical Dielectric Integrated Guides and 
Circuits, Wiley-Blackwell 
2. Liu, D., Gaucher, B., Pfeiffer, U., and Grzyb, J., (2009), Advanced millimeter wave 
technologies, Wiley 
3. Hueber, G., and Niknejad, A. (Eds.). (2019), Millimeter-Wave Circuits for 5G and 
Radar (The Cambridge RF and Microwave Engineering Series), Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
1. Mandal, M. K., Millimeter-wave technology, NPTEL Course Material, Indian Institute 
of Technology Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117105139/ 
 
Preparatory Course Material  
1.  Pozar, D. M., (2011), Microwave Engineering, 4th ed. New York, NY, USA: Wiley 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Title Selected Topics in Communication I Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 
Offered for M.Tech., PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite Fundamentals of Wireless Communications   
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Expose the students to the latest upcoming fields in the area of communications 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply the knowledge of recent topics  in the field of communications to specific 
areas of research  
 
Contents  
The topic clouds for the course include some contemporary topics in communications 
(but not restricted to) mm-Wave wireless communications, wireless networks, quantum 
information processing, molecular communications. The topics may be further updated 
according to the instructor. 
 
Textbook  
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
 
 
 
 
Title Selected Topics in Communication II Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 
Offered for M.Tech., PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite Fundamentals of Wireless Communications   
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Expose the students to the latest upcoming fields in the area of communications 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply the knowledge of recent topics  in the field of communications to specific 
areas of research  
 
Contents  
The topic clouds for the course include some contemporary topics in communications 
(but not restricted to) mm-Wave wireless communications, wireless networks, quantum 
information processing, molecular communications. The topics may be further updated 
according to the instructor. 
 
Textbook  
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Title Selected Topics in Communication III Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech., PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite Fundamentals of Wireless Communications   
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Expose the students to the latest upcoming fields in the area of communications 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply the knowledge of recent topics  in the field of communications to specific 
areas of research  
 
Contents  
The topic clouds for the course include some contemporary topics in communic ations 
(but not restricted to) mm-Wave wireless communications, wireless networks, quantum 
information processing, molecular communications. The topics may be further updated 
according to the instructor. 
 
Textbook  
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Title Physical Layer Security Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech. (IV Year), M. Tech., Ph. D. Type Elective  
Prerequisite Fundamentals of Information Theory    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Familiarize the students with the fundamental concepts of information theoretic 
security such as perfect secrecy, wiretap channels, secrecy capacity etc. 
2. Help students understand the proofs of fundamental theorems in information 
theoretic secrecy 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Acquire the current state of research on physical layer security  
2.  Apply the physical layer security techniques learnt to formulate a problem for 
research and solve them in a comprehensive manner 
Contents  
Fundamentals of Physical Layer Security: Information-theoretic secrecy, secret 
communication over noisy channels, Secret-key generation from noisy channels 
Coding for secrecy:  Coding for wiretap channels, Polar wiretap codes,  LDPC codes for 
the Gaussian wiretap channel 
Physical Layer Security Techniques: Cooperative jamming, MIMO signal processing 
algorithms for enhanced physical layer security, secrecy through intentional 
uncertainty, secure modulation schemes, secure  
Applications to Contemporary Communication Systems: secure waveforms for 5G, 
security of massive MIMO and mm -Wave cellular systems, security in IoT and massive 
machine type communications: issues and challenges 
Textbook  
1. Bloch, M. and Barros, J., (2011), Physical-Layer Security: From Information Theory 
to Security Engineering, 1st Edition, Cambridge University Press. 
2. Zhou, X., Song, L., and Zhang, Y., (2013), Physical Layer Security in Wireless 
Communications, 1st Edition, CRC Press. 
3. Duong, T. Q., Zhou, X.,  and Poor, H. V., (2016), Trusted Communications with 
Physical Layer Security for 5G and Beyond, 1st Edition, IET. 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Liu, R. and Trappe, W., (2010), Securing Wireless Communications at the Physical 
Layer, 1st Edition, Springer. 
 
 
Title Computational imaging Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. IV Year, M. Tech., Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Basics of signals and systems   
 
Objectives 
     The Instructor will: 
1.  Introduce computational techniques and aspects of image capture, processing and 
rendering  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Implement end-to-end imaging systems that can capture and process visual data in 
a desired manner 
 
Contents  
Introduction and digital photography pipeline (3 lectures) 
Pinholes and lenses, Photographic optics and exposure, High dynamic range imaging,  
tonemapping and bilateral filtering (7 lectures) 
Gradient-domain image processing, Focal stacks and lightfields (6 lectures) 
Deconvolution, Camera models and calibration (6 lectures) 
Two-view geometry, Radiometry and reflectance, Photometric stereo, Light transport 
matrices  
(6 lectures)   
Computational light transport, Stereo and structured light (6 lectures)  
Time-of-flight imaging, Non-line-of-sight imaging, Fourier optics (8 lectures) 
Textbook  
1. Szeliski, R., (2010), Computer vision: Algorithms and Applications,  1st Edition, 
Springer 
2. Lukac, R., (2010), Computational Photography: Applications and Methods, 1st 
Edition, CRC Press 
Self Learning Material  
1. Gkioulekas, I., Computational Photography, Fall 2019 , Department of Computer 
Science, Carnegie Melon University, http://graphics.cs.cmu.edu/courses/15-463/ 
 
 
Title Multimedia Communications  Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. IV Year, M. Tech., Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Fourier analysis   
Objectives 
     The Instructor will: 
1.  introduce concepts in multimedia communication systems with focus on technology 
specific standards   
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Implement and improve upon recent standards in multimedia communication   
Contents  
Introduction to multimedia signals: capture, storage and representation of im age, video 
and audio signals. Analog -to-digital conversion, sampling and aliasing , brief 
discussion on graphics and text content (4 lectures) 
Multimedia compression:  the need for compression and brief history of standards (3 
lectures) 
MPEG 7 and MPEG 21: evolution from MPEG 1,2 and MPEG 4,  multimedia content 
management and description standards, applications and implementations (5 
lectures) 
Introduction and Evolution of video coding standards: the ne ed for continuous 
improvements in standards (2 lectures) 
H.264/MPEG-4 AVC: intra and inter frames, mode decision, I, P , B frames, prediction, 
motion Compensation (6 lectures) 
HEVC/H.265: the need for H.265, concept of codin g tree u nits (CTU), adaptive 
macroblock sizes, directional modes, scalability to higher resolutions (5 lectures)  
Scalable video coding: SVC (annex G ext. of H.264/MPEG -4 AVC) and SHVC (scalable 
ext. of HEVC) (5 lectures) 
HDR and WCG coding:  backward compatilbity with single and dua l layer, display 
adaptation (5 lectures)  
Multiview and adaptive coding:  MVC Extension of H.264/AV C, introduction to MPEG -
DASH (3 lectures)  
Future standards: Versatile video coding (VVC) or H.266, 360-video specific standard,  
perceptual video compression, deep learning to enhance compression performance (4 
lectures) 
 
 
Textbook  
Self Learning Material  
1. Motion Pictures Experts Group (MPEG), ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 29/WG 11, 
https://mpeg.chiariglione.org/ 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. Katsaggelos, A.K., Fundamentals of Image and Video Processing , Coursera, 
Northwestern University, https://www.coursera.org/learn/digital 
2. Wiegand, T., Sullivan, G.J., Bjontegaard, G., Luthra, A., Overview of the H.264/AVC 
video coding standard, IEEE, 2003 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Title Speech and Audio Signal Processing Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech, M.Tech. -Ph.D.  Dual Degree (Comm. 
Engg.) 
Type Elective 
Prerequisite Digital Signal Processing   
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce the theory of signal processing applications on speech, to give information 
about human speech production and perception, voice production mechanism, and 
human perception systems.  
2. Provide an understanding of time frequency analysis of speech,  Linear Prediction, 
speech analysis/synthesis.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Analyze digital signals, e.g., audio signals, in the time or frequency domain 
2. Implement widely-used algorithms for speech analysis and speech processing in the 
frequency or time domain.  
 
Contents  
Introduction to the properties of speech and audio signal processing  (2 Lectures) 
 
Basic Methods of audio signal processing:Frequency analysis methods, Auto correlation 
Function(ACF), Power Spectral Density(PSD), Measurement of room impulse response 
and reverberation times (8 Lectures) 
 
Methods for codebook processing: Principle, Trainin g of codebooks, Efficient codebook 
search(8 Lectures) 
 
Audio coding: Prediction coding, line spectral frequencies(LSF), code excited linear 
prediction(CELP) (8 lectures) 
 
Speaker detection based on MFCC combined with LDA and PCA, Speech recognition, 
Acoustic Classification Methods: Bayes Methods, HMM, GMM (12 Lectures) 
 
Music Signal Processing, e.g. beat detection. (4 Lectures) 
 
Textbook 
1. Rabiner, L. and Schafer, R., (2011), Theory and Applications of Speech Processing , 
Pearson. 
2. Rabiner, L. and Schafer, R., (2007), Introduction to Digital speech Processing , 
Publishers Inc. 
3. Gold, B., and Morgan, N., (2011), Speech and Audio Signal Processing, John Wiley. 
 
Self-Learning Material: 
1. Hegde, R. M., Signal Processing Techniques for Speech Recognition, NPTEL 
Course Material, Department of Electronics & Communication Engineering, 
Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur,  https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/117104023/ 
2. http://www.infocobuild.com/education/audio-video-
courses/electronics/elec9344-audio-processing-unsw.html 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. Dutta Roy S. C., Digital Signal Processing, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117102060/ 
 
 
 
 
  
Title Wavelets Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. -Ph.D.  Dual Degree (Comm. Engg.) Type Elective 
Prerequisite Digital Signal Processing   
 
Objectives 
The Instructor Will: 
1. Introduce the idea of wavelets, and the related notions of time -frequency analysis, of time -
scale analysis, and to describe the manner in which technical developments related to wavelets 
have led to numerous applications 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Understand the relationship between wavelets and multiresolution systems  
2. Apply the wavelets for different real time application 
Contents  
Introduction to Multiresolution Analysis (MRA), Vector spaces, Haar scaling function, Haar 
wavelet (8 Lectures) 
 
Two-band perfect reconstruction filter bank,  Conditions for perfect reconstruction in a general 
two-band perfect reconstruction filter bank (8 Lectures) 
 
Daubechies family of filter banks (6 Lectures) 
 
Time-bandwidth product and its properties, Uncertainty principle of signal processing, Short -
time Fourier transform (STFT), Continuous wavelet transform (CWT), Admissibility condition for 
wavelets (12 Lectures) 
 
Axioms of MRA, Proof of Theorem of MRA (5 Lectures) 
 
5/3 filter bank used in JPEG 2000 (3 Lecture) 
 
Textbook  
1. Y. T. Chan, (1993), Wavelet Basics, Kluwer Publishers, Boston. 
2. Gerald Kaiser, (1992), A Friendly Guide to Wavelets, Birkhouser, New York. 
3. Daubechies, I., (1993), Ten Lectures on Wavelets , Society for Industrial and Applied 
mathematics. 
 
Self-Learning Material: 
1. Gadre V. M., Adv. Digital Signal Processing- Multirate and Wavelets, Department of Electrical 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, 
http://nptel.iitm.ac.in/courses/117101001 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. Dutta Roy S. C., Digital Signal Processing, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117102060/  
 
 
  
Title Compressive Sensing Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech., M. Tech. and Ph. D.  Type Elective  
Prerequisite Signals and Systems, Random Signal Analysis   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Introduce development of compressed sensing and matrix completion, focusing on 
the design and analysis of algorithms to recover data from its compressed and/or 
incomplete measurements. 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Use signal processing techniques to solve undetermined linear systems. 
Contents  
Sparse representation: Sparse representation in over -complete basis, Uniqueness and 
uncertainty principles, l0 minimization and l1 minimization (7 Lectures) 
Model selection in lin ear regression: Prediction risk, l 0-penalized regression and Lasso, 
Risk inflation, Minimax risk for sparse vectors (7 Lectures) 
Lasso algorithms and extensions: Proximal gradient methods, Nesterov accelerated 
methods, Group lasso and elastic net (7 Lectures) 
Compressed sensing and sparse recovery: Restricted isometry property (RIP), A RIPless 
theory, Golfing scheme, Phase transition and convex geometry (7 Lectures) 
Low-rank matrix recovery: Spectral method, Nuclear norm minimization (4 Lectures) 
Super-resolution and spectral estimation: Model mismatch issue in compressed sensing, 
Matrix pencil approach, Atomic norm minimization, Connection to low -rank matrix 
completion (10 Lectures) 
Textbook 
1.Hastie T., Tibshirani R. and Wainwright M., (2015), Statistical learning with sparsity: 
the Lasso and generalizations, CRC. 
2. Foucart S. and Rauhut H., (2013), A mathematical introduction to  compressive 
sensing, Springer. 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Compressive Sensing resources, Rice University, http://dsp.rice.edu/cs/ 
 
 
 
 
Title Selected Topics in Signal Processing I Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 
Offered for M.Tech., PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Expose the students to the latest upcoming fields in the area of signal 
processing 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply the knowledge of recent topics  in the field of signal processing to specific 
areas of research  
 
Contents  
The topics may be further updated according to the instructor. 
 
Textbook  
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Title Selected Topics in Signal Processing II Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 
Offered for M.Tech., PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Expose the students to the latest upcoming fields in the area of signal 
processing 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply the knowledge of recent topics  in the field of signal processing to specific 
areas of research  
 
Contents  
The topics may be further updated according to the instructor. 
 
Textbook  
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Title Selected Topics in Signal Processing III Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech., PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Expose the students to the latest upcoming fields in the area of signal 
processing 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply the knowledge of recent topics  in the field of signal processing to specific 
areas of research  
 
Contents  
The topics may be further updated according to the instructor. 
 
Textbook  
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Title Data Compression Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech., M.Tech., and Ph.D Type Elective 
Prerequisite Elementary knowledge of Information Theory   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Introduce basic principles of data compression methods 
2.  Familiarize students with the advances in data compression methods 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Implement some of the existing compression methods 
2.  Contribute in developing application-specific such methods 
Contents  
Basic Techniques: Run length coding, sampling and quantization, some statistical 
methods such Huffman, Arithmetic, Golomb, and QM Coder(4 lectures) 
Dictionary Methods: String compression, Lemple and ziv methods and some of their 
variants. Zip and Gzip (4 Lectures) 
Image and Video Coding:Concept of spatial and temporal redundancies, Predictive and 
transform based methods for Lossless and Lossy Image compression, Lossless Medical 
Image compression standards, Some still image compression standards such JPEG 
Baseline, JPEG-LS, JPEG 2000, Video Coding, Block matching and computational issues, 
MPEGs, Compression standards for 3D TV (18 Lectures) 
Audio Compression: Human Auditory system, A-Law and mu-Law companding, Adaptive 
DPCM and computational issues, Delta modulation, Audio and Speech compression, 
MPEG-1 audio coding (14 Lectures) 
Case studies: Current needs in Image, video, and text compression (2 Lectures) 
Textbook  
1. Khalid, S., (2006), Introduction to Data Compression, Elsevier 
2. Solomon, D., (2007), Data Compression, The complete Reference, Springer 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Sengupta, S., Digital Voice and Picture Communication , NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Electrical and Electronics Communication Engineering, Indian 
Institute of Technology Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117105081/ 
 
Preparatory Material  
1. Lathi, B. P., Ding, Z., Gupta , H. M.,  Modern Digital And Analog Communication 
Systems, Chapter 12 Introduction to Information Theory: Fourth Edition, Oxford 
University Press   
 
 
 