Source: http://intra.iitj.ac.in/acad_website/intra/Environmental%20Engg.%20curriculum_document-2020-08-25-17-52-pm.pdf
================================================================================

M. Tech. and M. Tech. – Ph. D. Dual
Degree 
in 
Infrastructure Engineering with 
Specialization in Environmental 
Engineering 
Introduction 
There is no denying in the fact that we are undergoing unprecedented to rapid demographic 
and technological change. The unabated rapid growth of the world population leading to 
resource scarcity and urbanization in both developed and emerging countries is posing a 
serious challenge to our society. The effects of such developments are not easy to 
comprehend as they change e xtremely fast and have systemic effect. The intertwined 
impacts of environmental issues, technology choices, production and consumption 
practices, industrial processes and pricing policies on human health is far more complex 
than realized. To handle these global environmental challenges of 21st century and tasks of 
the future, our silo behavior needs to be transformed into more systemic and integrative 
way by utilizing the potential of  diverse fields of classical Environmental Engi neering, 
Energy and Geology, Biological processes, Public health and Safety, Economics, and Data 
analytics. These major thrust areas will not only assist in shifting our focus from 
conventional end -of-pipe solutions to environment protection, pollution prevention and 
waste minimiza tion but also transcend towards design of safe and sustainable 
infrastructure. 
With this systemic vision, IIT Jodhpur is offering M. Tech and M. Tech-Ph.D. program in 
Infrastructure Engineering with specialization in Environmental Engine ering. The main 
objective of this specialized program is to contribute towards ecological and sustainable 
development of our built environment and the associated necessary and rapid 
transformations leading  towards a decarbonized economy. It is one of its kind of 
interdisciplinary program designed to create a knowledge bridge across public health and 
physical, biological and chemical facets of science and engineering. 
The program provides students an opportunity to acquire new technical competences in 
various environmental mod els and processes that form the core of relevant engineering 
practices, and future academic and professional environmental leaders. Our future 
engineers will extend their knowledge from core technical competencies of Environmental 
Engineering to in -depth u nderstanding of social, economic and health consequences of 
pollution problems, natural disasters, exceedances, climate change and other related threats. 
Objective of the program 

The unique program of M. Tech and M. Tech -Ph.D. in Infrastructure Engineering with 
specialization in Environmental Engineering aims to produce scientifically and 
technologically resourceful professionals with broad knowledge of environmental 
processes and engineering techniques integrated with basic knowledge of biosafety, 
toxicology and other public health issues  required in identifying emerging complex 
problems at the interface of environment engineering and public health, and creatively 
developing effective solutions. This specially tailored program will enable students to think 
proactively and preemptively while confronting public health challenges emerging out of 
local and global environmental issues.  The integration of major thrust areas of Civil, 
Infrastructure and Environmental Engineering with Public health in this cross-disciplinary 
program will enable graduates to interface between urban development and the sustainable 
environment. 
Expected Graduate Attributes 
A successful graduate of this program should be able to: 
1. Possess detailed knowledge of air and water pollution, fate and transport of pollutants,
related ecological processes, conventional as well as advanced monitoring techniques,
and small and large-scale treatment techniques.
2. Identify the causes and assess impacts of pollution and other varied dimensions of
environmental problems useful in environmental and health risk assessment while
framing environmental policy guidelines.
3. Utilize working knowledge of engineered systems, and ecological a nd biological
processing techniques in designing innovative Solid Waste Management solutions and
remediation techniques.
4. Develop basic understanding of Remote Sensing and GIS techniques for their
integrated use in addressing environmental problems as well as public health issues.
5. Engage themselves as a spokesperson in the political discourse and objective supporter
of society, politics and their decisions for a sustainable future.
6. Develop understanding of geomorphology in managing natural hazards.
7. Use computational and advanced data analytical techniques to augment and extend the
existing ideas, approaches or actions in the field of environment and public health.
8. Engage in ethical and responsible practices while pursuing professional growth.
9. Communicate scientific ideas or applications effectively with a large range of
audiences.
Learning Outcomes 
1. Achieve proficiency in transport and fate of contaminants in water and mechanistic
aspects of advanced wastewater treatment systems to provide innovative solutions to
rural and urban water challenges.
2. Develop understanding of the emission, sources and transportation of air pollutants
and underpinning theories in designing, monitoring, control and treatment techniques.
3. Comprehend and con ceptualize various ecological  and biological water and soil
treatments, and choose appropriate solid and hazardous waste management strategies
as well as recycling systems by applying the basic principles of biosafety and health.
4. Develop understanding of natural hazards and fundamental physical processes driving
regional and global climate change, and basics of climate modelling and climate
projections.
5. Achieve fundamental understanding of geospatial techniques (Remote Sensing and
Geographic Information Sys tem) in the assessment, monitoring, and mitigation of
environmental systems and public health issues.
6. Ability to identify the (a) opportunities to apply conventional and standard methods;
(b) potential of advanced data  analytics as well as inherent limitations and biases of
computational techniques; and (c) methods of improvement.
7. Able to alter the historic pattern of approaching environmental engineering problems
and promote safety, welfare of public and environmental health through the knowledge
gained in this hybrid program.
Program Structure: 
Overall Structure (M. Tech. in Infrastructure  Engineering with Major in 
Environmental Engineering) 
Category Program 
Core 
Specialization 
Stream 
Electives 
(SSE) 
M. 
Tech.  
Elective 
(ME) 
M. 
Tech. 
Open 
(MO) 
M. 
Tech. 
Project 
(MP) 
Non-
Graded 
Courses 
Total 
Graded 
Credits 3 17 17 3 16 4 60 
Semester wise distribution of credits 
Cat. Course Title L-T-P Credits  Cat. Course Title L-T-P Credits 
I Semester  II Semester 
PC Program Core 3-0-0 3  SSE Specialization stream - 
5 
2-0-
0
2 
SSE Specialization stream - 
1 
3-0-0 3  SSE Specialization stream - 
6 
3-0-
2
4 
SSE Specialization stream - 
2 
3-0-2 4  ME Program Elective – 1 3-0-
0
3 
SSE Specialization stream -3 3-0-2 4  ME Program Elective – 2 3-0-
0
3 
NG HSN7XX0: Technical 
Communication 
1-0-0 1  ME Program Elective - 3 3-0-
0
3 
 NG OAL7XX0: Innovation 
and IP Management 
1-0-
0
1 
Total (Graded + Non-graded) 15  Total (Graded + Non-graded) 16 
III Semester  IV Semester 
MP Project-1 0-0-10 5  MP Project-2 0-0-
22
11 
ME Program Elective - 4 3-0-0 3  NG HSN7XX0:  Professional 
Ethics 
1-0-
0
1 
ME Program Elective - 5 3-0-0 3 
ME Program Elective - 6 2-0-0 2 
NG OAN7XX0: Systems 
Engineering and Project 
Management 
1-0-0 1 
MO Open Elective-1 3-0-0 3 
Total (Graded+ Non-graded) 17  Total (Graded + Non-graded) 12 
List of Core Courses 
S.No. Course Title L-T-P Credits 
1. Introduction to Sustainable Infrastructure Engineering 3-0-0 3 
List of Specialization Stream Courses 
(Student may choose any 17 credits from the list below in addition to the mandatory 
program core) 
S.No. Course Title L-T-P Credits 
1. Air Pollution and Control 3-0-0 3 
2. Advanced Wastewater Treatment 3-0-2 4 
3. Solid Waste Management 3-0-0 3 
4. Remote Sensing and GIS for Environment   Management 3-0-2 4 
5. Climate Change and Impact 3-0-0 3 
6. Environmental Engineering Laboratory 1-0-4 3 
7. Environmental Economics and Management 3-0-0 3 
8. Environmental Hydrology 3-0-2 4 
9. Environmental Biotechnology and Bioremediation 3-0-2 4 
10.  Machine Learning for Environmental Engineering. 3-0-0 3 
11.  Statistics for Environmental Engineering 3-0-2 4 
12.  Environmental Impact Assessment 3-0-0 3 
13.  Ecological Engineering 3-0-0 3 
14.  Fate of Chemicals in the Environment 3-0-0 3 
15.  Indoor Air Pollution 2-0-0 2 
16.  Environmental Microbiology 2-0-0 2 
17.  Biosafety and Public health 2-0-0 2 
18.  GIS and Public Health 3-0-0 3 
19.  Environmental and Health Risk Assessment 3-0-0 3 
20.  Geomorphology 3-0-0 3 
21.  Contaminant transport to sub-surface environments 3-0-0 3 
Topic Clouds Mapped with Specialization Stream Courses 
S.No. Courses Topic clouds 
1 Air Pollution and Control Sources and classification of air pollutants ; Air 
Quality standards; Aerosol dynamics; Pollutant 
removal; Meteorology; Dispersion modelling ; 
Effects of Air Pollution 
2 Advanced Wastewater 
Treatment 
Introduction to wastewater like municipal 
wastewater, industrial wastewater, 
characterisation, environmental norms; 
Conventional Wastewater Treatment such as 
screening, clarification, aerat ion, sand 
filtration, ACF etc; Membrane Based 
Wastewater Treatment like microfiltration (MF), 
ultrafiltration (UF), membrane bioreactor 
(MBR); Water Recycling and Reuse, Valuables 
from Wastewater, ZLD Processes 
3 Solid Waste Management Solid waste type, its Classification and 
management; Waste collection system and 
transport; Waste separation and Processing ; 
4Rs; Waste disposal methods, and their pros 
and cons 
4 Remote Sensing and GIS 
for Environment  
Management 
Basic principles of Surveying and GIS; Airborne 
or Satellite systems ; Functional Imaging 
Technologies and Image Interpretation 
5 Climate Change and 
Impact 
Climate and Climate Change ; Convection 
motion and Atmospheric circulations ; Role of 
Oceans; Radiative Heat Transfer ; Climate 
feedbacks; Climate variability; Climate 
sensitivity; Global Circulation Model 
6 Environmental 
Engineering Laboratory 
Organic Pollution load testing (COD, BOD, DO); 
Nitrogen, Phosphorus and Fluoride testing ; 
Disinfection method ; Microbiological tests ; 
Advanced Analytical Instrumentation 
7 Environmental Economics 
and Management 
Cost of Environmental Protection, Positive and 
Normative Analysis; Markets and Market 
Failure, cost -benefit analysis; Economic 
Valuation; Emission Fees & Marketable permits; 
Transboundary Pollution; Environmental Justice 
and Environmental Ethics 
8 Environmental Hydrology Water food industry nexus, transport from 
precipitation to ground water, modeling 
hydrologic cycles; precipitation trends and 
frequencies; Infiltration and soil Moisture 
Management; peak run off and storm water run 
off; Streams; Floods and Hydraulic Contro l 
Structures; Detention and Retention ponds; 
ground water mapping 
9 Environmental 
Biotechnology and 
Bioremediation 
Basics of Microbiology; Kinetics and Reactors; 
The activated sludge process; Nitrification and 
denitrification; Phosphorus removal; Drinking 
water treatment; Anaerobic treatment by 
methanogenesis; Detoxification of hazardous 
chemicals; Bioremediation 
10 Machine Learning for 
Environmental 
Engineering 
Regression; Gradient Descent; Support Vector 
Machine; Decision Trees; Neural Networks; 
Model selection and validation; Nearest 
Neighbour; Clustering; Dimensionality 
reduction; Generative Models; Feature 
Selection and Generation; Application to 
Environmental data 
11 Statistics for 
Environmental 
Engineering 
Statistics and Probability; Data types; Error 
estimation and propagation; Sampling design 
methods; Control charts; Estimation of 
parameters; Hypothesis testi ng; Linear 
regression, multiple regression, regression 
comparison; Spatial and time series analysis; 
ANOVA; Ranked data, spearaman rank 
correlation; Monte Carlo Methods; Toxicology 
concerns, Quantal response 
12 Environmental Impact 
Assessment 
Evolution of  EIA, forecasting environmental 
changes, clearance procedure; Stages of EIA, 
EIA monitoring and auditing; EIA regulations, 
EIA at regional, sectoral and policy level; 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP); Future 
strategies 
13 Ecological Engineering Ecological Engineering; Ecosystem Valuation, 
Bioenergy Analysis, Life cycle analysis, Natural 
Treatment Systems; Water Runoff and design 
for hydrologic control, Rain gardens; 
Framework and theory of natural restoration; 
Risk Assessment; Ecological Modelling 
14 Fate of Chemicals in the 
Environment 
Diffusion, Dispersion, Advection, Partitioning in 
multi-component systems, Basics of fugacity -
Mackay models, Diffusion/advection equation 
for transport in soil, infiltration and leaching, 
evaporation and capillary  transport, 
Hydrograph, Analytical Steady -State Surface 
Water Model, Runoff, Streams, Mass Balances 
and Plug flow; Wetlands, Nutrient loading 
criteria, Streeter-Phelps Equation; Dry and wet 
deposition at surfaces or soil, uptake  by plant 
roots, transpiration 
15 Indoor Air Pollution Indoor environment, Standards and 
Regulations, Control strategies; Sick Buildings, 
Dose-Response Characteristics Human 
Exposure Assessment; Ventilation, Air flow 
distribution; Pollutant emission rates and 
emission factors, Control/removal techniques; 
Disease transmission modes, Infectious 
aerosols, Risk estimation methods 
16 Environmental 
Microbiology 
Microbial  Evolution and Biodiversity, Microbial 
Communities, Interactions,  and Ecosystems; 
Biomass, Abiotic Factors, Microorganisms in 
Air, Water, and Soil; Biogeochemical cycling, 
Waste management; Microorganisms in 
Mineral and Energy Recovery; Fuel and 
Biomass Production 
17 Biosafety and Public 
health 
Principles of Biosafety, Regulatory bodies and 
Statutory regulations, Biosafety cabinet, 
Containment of infectious microorganisms, 
Methods of disposal -disinfection, BSL -1,2,3,4; 
Good Laboratory Practices,  Laboratory Safety 
Practices; Handling and Transport of biologically 
hazardous substances; Safety, Health and 
Environmental Protection (SHE) and 
Occupational Safety and Health Administration 
(OSHA) standards; Material Safety Data sheets, 
Toxicology, LD50,LD10; Risk Assessment, 
Dose-Response relationship, R isk Management 
and Communication, Risk Analysis methods 
18 GIS and Public Health GIS, Health application; Spatial data collection 
and analysis; Database for public health; 
Mapping health information; Spatial clustering 
of health events; Environmental hazards; Risk 
and Spread of Infectious diseases; Ecology of 
Vector-Borne diseases; Health disparities 
19 Environmental and Health 
Risk Assessment 
Legal balancing of risks, economic costs, and 
benefits, Probabilistic reasoning; Risk, Cost, 
and Benefit Analysis (RCBA); Exposure -
response models, Regression, Time series 
analysis, Model selection; Probabilistic dose -
response models, Moolgavkar, Venzon, a nd 
Knudson Cancer model; Monte Carlo method; 
Bootstrap methods; Markov chain monte carlo; 
Entropy of information, Casual models; Meta -
analysis, pooling sample data, and statistical 
decision rules; Contingency tables in risk 
assessment and management; Stati stical 
associations and causation; Risk -based 
corrective action framework; US EPA Risk 
assessment framework; Simple dynamic model 
of infection; Toxicological modelling for risk 
assessment; Decisions for risk management 
20 Geomorphology Earth’ components, Geological time scale; 
Weathering and Mass Wasting processes; 
Streams, Classification, Channels, Fluvial 
landforms; Desert Geomorphology; Glaciers: 
formation, types, movement, processes; 
Ocean: waves, currents and tides, sediments, 
processes; Continental d rifts, Plate tectonics; 
Continental crust and plate tectonics, 
Paleoseismology; Earthquakes, Volcanoes: 
Magma and Lava flows, classification, 
distribution, Explosivity Index; 
Geomorphological hazard; Hazard assessment 
for risk analysis and risk management;  
Geomorphic hazards and sustainable 
development; Geomorphology and disaster 
prevention 
21 Contaminant transport to 
sub-surface environments 
Natural and anthropogenic climatic changes, 
global climatic change, global carbon box 
model, global Nitrogen and Sulphur cycle, 
transport of chemicals and their reaction; 
Physical transport in surface waters, sediment 
transport, distribution of sediment, ,  dissolved 
oxygen, chemical distribution among phases, 
and air -water exchanges; Darcy’s law, 
sorption, retardation, ground water movement, 
vadose zone dynamics; Salinity and Sodicity,  
leaching and unsaturated zone mass transport, 
drainage and irrigation m anagement; Metal 
transport, Bio-geochemical models 
List of Program (M.Tech.) Elective Courses 
S. No. Program Elective Course Title L-T-P Credits 
1. Stability of Slopes 3-0-0 3 
2. Rock Mechanics and Rock Engineering 3-0-0 3 
3. Reliability Engineering 3-0-0 3 
4. Structural Dynamics 3-0-0 3 
5. Wind and Earthquake Engineering 3-0-0 3 
6. Offshore Geo-technology 3-0-0 3 
7. Green Building and Sustainable Materials 3-0-0 3 
8. Traffic Flow Theory 3-0-0 3 
9. Traffic System and Management 3-0-0 3 
10. Environmental Aspects of Power Plant 1-0-0 1 
11. Soil Stabilization and Ground Improvement 3-0-0 3 
12. Foundation Engineering 3-0-0 3 
13. Advanced Mechanics of Solids 3-0-0 3 
14. Theory of Vibration 3-0-0 3 
15. Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion 1-0-0 1 
16. Process Safety and Hazards 3-0-0 3 
17. Advanced Energy Systems 3-0-0 3 
18. Plugin Electric Vehicles 3-0-2 4 
19. Smart Grid 3-0-2 4 
20. Transmission Infrastructure 3-0-0 3 
21. Substation Infrastructure 2-0-0 2 
22. Gas Insulated Substations 2-0-0 2 
23. Power System Protection 3-0-0 3 
24. Cyber-Physical Security in Smart Grid 3-0-0 3 
25. Energy Harvesting 3-0-0 3 
26. Energy Economics and Policy 1-0-0 1 
27. Wind turbine and field design 3-0-0 3 
28. Off-shore Wind Energy Harvesting 3-0-0 3 
29. Off-shore Tidal Energy Harvesting 3-0-0 3 
30. Power Plant Engineering 3-0-2 4 
31. Energy Storage 3-0-0 3 
32. Biomass Energy Conversion 3-0-2 4 
33. Hydrogen and Methanol Economy 3-0-0 3 
34. Hydropower 3-0-0 3 
35. Fuel Cell Technology 3-0-0 3 
36. Electrochemical Conversion and Storage 3-0-0 3 
37. Selected Topics in Distributed Generations 3-0-0 3 
38. Materials for Electrochemical energy Conversion and 
Storage 
2-0-0 2 
39. Solar Energy and Application 3-0-0 3 
40. Artificial Intelligence-I 3-0-0 3 
Course Content of Program Core Course 
Title Introduction to Sustainable 
Infrastructure Engineering 
Number MEL7XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P-Th
[C]
3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech/M. Tech-PhD Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite B.Tech Degree
Objectives: This course aims at 
1. Presenting elements and components of sustainable infrastructure creation and
management.
2. Introducing practices of water management, greenhouse gas reduction, and green
city planning.
Learning Outcomes 
The students will acquire- 
1. Fundamentals and principles of sustainable engineering design.
2. Knowledge of existing frameworks to achieve long-term sustainability.
3. Methods and techniques for waste water  management and greenhouse gas emission
reduction.
4. Knowledge on the engineering and architectural aspects overall green city planning.
Content: 
Process of sustainable engineering design : key principle of sustainability; 
Integration of architecture and engineering; design drivers for sustainable infrastructure 
system; implementation [Lectures 6]. 
Sustainable infrastructure framework:  Green building rating system;  sustainable 
infrastructure frameworks: pillars of sustainability, scale -density framework, transec t, 
built form-ecology framework [Lectures 6]. 
Water conservation and supply:  water management plans; achieving water balance; 
analyzing water resources; water supply strategies [Lectures 6]. 
Integrated water management:  integrated storm water management; urban storm 
water treatment strategies; constraints and barriers to implementation; gray water 
treatment and reuse; integrating gray water into a water reso urces master plan; black 
water management approaches [Lectures 6]. 
Energy and greenhouse gases:  reducing demand by design; designing sustainable 
power supplies; addressing climate change and reducing carbon footprint; policy 
measures for increasing energy  security and efficiency; design guide lines and 
performance standards [Lectures 6]. 
Sustainable site planning, built systems, and material flows:  sustainable site 
planning; green streets and transportation network; working with the land; material and 
waste flows [Lectures 6]. 
City-scale approach:  Case study1 (Guangzhou: city -scale transformation in China); 
Case study 2 (Tianjin: Eco -city master plan); Case -study 3 (PlaNYC: integrated storm  
water approach); Case study 4 (San Francisco city greening initiative) [Lectures 6]. 
Reference Books 
1. S. Bry Sarté (2010) Sustainable Infrastructure. John Wiles & Sons, Inc. ISBN 978 -0-
470-91293-5.
Course Content of Specialization Stream Course 
Air Pollution and Control 
Title Air Pollution and Control Number 
Department Civil Engineering L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-Ph.D. [CIE-EE] Type Specialization 
Stream Elective 
Prerequisite 
Objectives 
1. To gain understanding of basic concept of air pollution, its sources and effects on human
health and climate.
2. To introduce concepts of aerosol dynamics used in ambient sampling, designing
measurement technologies and air quality modeling.
3. To develop understanding of the concepts and strategies for control of particulate matter
and gas-phase pollutants.
4. To provide knowledge of current state of the atmosphere and introduce fundamentals of
pollutant transport and dispersion, and modeling.
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to achieve proficiency in: 
1. Developing a broad overview of local -to-global scale pollution issues and their specific
impact on human health and environment.
2. Solving problems related to dispersion and air quality modeling
3. Understanding the source level air pollution issues and identify the right control
techniques/measures to meet the desired standard levels.
4. Computing the performance of various unit operations and processes used in the air
treatment.
Contents 
Introduction to air pollution: Historical events [Meuse River Valley 1930, Donora 
Pennsylvania 1948, London Sm og 1952, Bhopal Gas Tragedy 1984, and related  Concepts], 
Scales of air pollution, Sources and classification [CAPs and HAPs] of air pollutants, Air quality 
and standards, Emission Inventory, The Earth’s atmosphere: Structure and Composition, and 
energy balance [Lectures 6]. 
Aerosol Physics: Fundamentals: Source, Size and Size distribution, Gas and Particle motion: 
Brownian motion, Diffusion, Inertia, External force field, Aerosol dynamics: coagulation, 
condensation, nucleation, particle measurements and Sampling techniques [Lectures 10]. 
Emissions Control devices:  Removal of particles from gas stream: Settling chambers, 
Cyclone separators, electrostatic precipitation, filtration, wet collectors, collection efficiency; 
Removal of gases from effluents stream:  Absorption by liquids, adsorption on solids, 
Examples: SO2 and NOx removal [Lectures 8]. 
Meteorology: Atmospheric meteorology,  Wind velocity profile and Wind rose, turbulence, 
inversion layer and mixing depth and Atmospheric Stability [Lectures 6]. 
Dispersion of air pollutants and Air Quality modeling:  Dispersion models, Gaussian 
dispersion model: assumptions, dispersion parameters and effective stack height, plume rise 
and plume behavior, Receptor models , Introduction to Dispersion and receptor modeling 
software [Lectures 6]. 
Effects of Air Pollution on Climate and Human health: Tropospheric Ozone chemistry, 
Photochemical Smog, Acid Rain, Visibility, Indoor Air Pollution, Dose Response and Health 
effects [Lectures 4]. 
Text Books 
1. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics- From Air Pollution to Climate Change, J. H. Seinfeld
and S. N. Pandis, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., Third Edition, 2013.
2. Aerosol Technology-Properties, Behavior and Measurement of Airborne Particles, W. C.
Hinds, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., Second Edition, 1998.
3. Introduction to Air Pollution Science, R. F. Phalen and R. N. Phalen, Jones & Bartlett
Learning, LLC, Burlington, MA, 2013.
4. Aerosol Measurement: Principles, Techniques and Applications, edited by K. Willeke, P.
Baron, Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1993.
Online course Material 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105104099/ 
Advanced Wastewater Treatment 
Title Advanced Wastewater Treatment Number 
Department (i) Chemical Engineering,
(ii) Civil and Infrastructure
Engineering
L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-2 [4]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE-EE] Type (i) 
Programme 
Elective for 
Chemical 
Engineering, 
(ii) 
Specialization 
Stream 
Elective for 
Environmental 
Engineering 
Prerequisite 
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. Impart comprehensive knowledge of industrial and municipal wastewater.
2. Discuss mechanism and methodologies for wastewater treatment.
3. Discuss case studies.
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the: 
1. Comprehensive knowledge of wastewater treatment.
2. Knowledge of advanced methodologies such as recycle and reuse.
Contents 
Introduction: Waste water engineering: an overview, characterisation of waste water and 
     monitoring of industrial and municipal waste water, emerging contaminants, 
environmental impacts of waste water constituents [Lectures 4]. 
Conventional Water and Waste Water Treatment: Existing unit operations and 
processes, basic 
philosophy of water treatment plants; physio-chemical treatment methods: (i)    Screening, 
(ii) conventional filtration (iii) coagulation, (iv) flocculation, (v) floatation (vi) Clari - 
flocculation (vii) sedimentation, (viii) sand filtration, etc. [Lectures 10].
Aerobic and Anaerobic Suspended and Attached Growth Waste Water Treatment 
Processes: 
     Aerated lagoon, activated sludge systems, trickling filter, sequential batch reactor, 
fluidized bed bioreactors, Up -flow Anaerobic Sludge Blanket (UASB) and hybrid Up -flow 
Anaerobic Sludge Blanket (UASB) reactors [Lectures 8]. 
Advanced Treatment Processes: Membrane Filtration, reverse osmosis, ultrafiltration, 
     nanofiltration and electrodialysis; wet air oxidation, adsorption and ion -exchange; Wet- 
     land and root-zone treatment of industrial and municipal wastes; Design of sludge drying 
     beds, thermal and biological processes for sludge and land fillings. Membrane Reactors, 
     New Technologies for Waste Water Disinfection [Lectures 12]. 
Water Recycling and Reuse:  Different unit operations for water recycling depending on  
end use,  energy considerations, recovery of valuables from waste water, zero liquid 
discharge (ZLD) [Lectures 8]. 
Waste Water Treatment Design Lab [28 hours] 
Clarifier 
Aerator 
Sand filtration system 
Municipal waste water system 
Grey water treatment system 
Sewage water treatment system 
Industrial waste water systems 
Pond water treatment 
Text Books 
1. Burton F.L., Tchobanoglous G., Stensel H.D., 2017, Waste Water Engineering
Treatment and Reuse, 4thed.,Tata McGraw-Hill.
2. Arceivala S.J. and Asolekar S.R., 2007, Wastewater Treatment for Pollution Control
and Reuse, 3rd Ed., Tata McGraw Hill.
Reference Books 
1. Henze M., van-Loosdrecht M.C.M., Ekama G.A. and Brdjanovic D., 2008, Biological
Wastewater Treatment: Principles, Modelling and Design, IWA publishing.
2. Sincero A.P. and Sincero G.A., 1996, Environmental Engineering – A Design
Approach, Prentice-Hall.
Online Course Material 
Tiwari M K, Wastewater treatment and recycling, NPTEL course material, Department of Civil 
Engineering, IIT Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105105178/ 
Solid Waste Management 
Title Solid Waste Management Number 
Department Civil and Infrastructure 
Engineering 
L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-Ph.D. [CIE-EE] Type Specialization 
Stream Elective 
Prerequisite 
Objectives 
1. To enable understanding of life cycle of waste generation to disposal or sustainable re -
use
2. To inculcate basic steps of solid waste management
3. To enable selection of best possible location specific solid waste management options
Learning outcomes 
1. Conceptually design waste conversion/treatment processes
2. Able to assess the environmental and the economic impact of specific types of solid waste
generated and its reuse
3. Enabled to develop innovative and smarter solutions of solid waste management at rural
and urban environs
Contents 
Solid waste type and Classification , Quantity, Types of Waste Stream and its life cycle 
Waste Generation - Industrial, Municipal and Agriculture, 4R strategies and Social costs 
[Lectures 4]. 
Collection and Transport: Collection Components, their Reliability, Scavengers, Automated 
Waste Collection, Design for Larger Transfer Operations, Automated Control, Inventory and 
Monitoring [Lectures 5]. 
Separation and Processing Techniques: Separation and Screening Equipment, 
Automated Sorters, Solid Waste Processing, Recovering, Waste to Energy transformation, E-
Waste, Size Reduction, Incineration and pyrolysis [Lectures 6]. 
Options for Disposal , Selection Criteria, Sanitary Landfill, Proper ties of Gases from 
Landfills, Hazards and Air Pollution, , Leachate Control and Management [Lectures 5]. 
Composting: Benefits of Composting, Biological Processes Involved in Composting Chemical 
Processes, Physical Processes, Thermodynamics of Compositing, Gasifying, Refuse-derived 
fuel, Thoughts on Circular Economy [Lectures 8]. 
Microbiology: Biological decomposition, Microbiology of composting, Municipal solid waste 
Pathogens, enteric microbes in landfills and leachate, Pure culture, Mixed culture screenin g 
tests [Lectures 6]. 
Reuse and Recycle : Reuse, Increased Product Lifetime, Material Life Cycle Studies, 
Recycling, New Materials-Self Destructing/Organic, MSW Handling Rules, Public Aptitude, and 
Legislation [Lectures 6]. 
Text Books 
1. George Tchobanoglous , Hilary Theisen, Samuel Vigil, Integrated Solid Waste
Management: Engineering Principles and Management Issues, McGraw -Hill Series in
Water Resources and Environmental Engineering, ISBN -10: 0070632375, ISBN -13:
978-0070632370
2. Kanti L. Shah, Basics of Solid and Hazardous Waste Management Technology, Prentice
Hall, ISBN-10: 0139603786, ISBN-13: 978-0139603785
3. Ni-Bin Chang, Ana Pires, Sustainable Solid Waste Management: A Systems
Engineering Approach, Wiley -IEEE Press; 1 edition (March 16, 2015), ISBN -10:
1118456912, ISBN-13: 978-1118456910
References Books 
1. Edward A. McBean, Frank A. Rovers, Grahame J. Farquhar, Solid Waste Landfill
Engineering and Design, Prentice Hall; ISBN -10: 0130791873, ISBN -13: 978 -
0130791870
2. Christian Ludwig,  Stefanie Hellweg,  Municipal Solid Waste Management  , Springer
2003, London, ISBN 978-3-642-62898-6.
3. Roger Tim Haug, Composting Engineering: Principles and Practice, Ann Arbor Science,
MI, ISBN-0-250-40347-1
Online Resources 
T V Ramachandra Municipal Soild Waste Managemen t, IISc Bangalore 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/120108005/ 
Solid and Hazardous Waste Management,IITM, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105106056/ 
Remote Sensing and GIS for Environment Management 
Title Remote Sensing and GIS for 
Environment Management 
Number 
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-2 [4]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE-EE] Type Specialization 
Stream 
Elective 
Prerequisite 
Objectives 
1. To introduce you to the basic principles of observing the Earth’s geography and concepts
of remote sensing
2. To explore its applications specific to the environment and natural resource management.
Learning Outcomes 
1. Identify and obtain appropriate satellite imagery for a land surface based resource
management, service infrastructure and real world application
2. Demonstrate proficiency in the common ( open source: QGIS/ Google Earth Engine,
ERDAS Imagine, ENVI) and advanced (ARCGIS, Ecognition, QT modeler) remote sensing
software packages
3. Conduct basic to intermediate remote sensing analyses (atmospheric and geographic
corrections, spectral transformations and enhancements, classification, modelling and
change detection)
Contents 
In-situ field observation ; data collection; Photographic and Remote Sensing data 
collection, Spectral spatial and temporal aspects, analog and digital processing introduction 
and sensing economics [4] 
Electromagnetics: conduction, convection and radiation; radiation and its models, [6]. 
Aerial Photography- Camera, photography filtration-films, planning field missions [4] 
Photogrammetry : Aerial photography, stereoscopy and its principles, image digitization, 
aero-triangulation, extracting spot elevation, contours and DEMs using soft copy 
photography, Ortho-imagery and Area Measurement [6] 
Multispectral Imagery: discrete detectors and s canning mirrors, Landsat: multi -spectral 
scanner,  thematic mapper, Enhanced Thematic Mapper plus (Landsat 7), , GOES -,AVHRR 
Radiometer, Aircraft Multispectral Scanners[8] 
Thermal Infrared Remote Sensing: Thermal infrared radiation properties, laws (Stefa n-
bolzmann, Wein’s, Kirchoff’s)[2] 
Microwave Remote Sensing: RADAR, SAR remote sensing, Radar interferometry, LIDAR 
Passive Microwave Remote Sensing- Radiometers. [3] 
Visual image Interpretation: The aerial/regional perspective, 3D depth perspective [5] 
Digital Image Interpretation and Analysis : Preprocessing of Images, Image 
Enhancement, Contrast and basics of spatial feature manipulation. [5] 
Note: Labs will have hands -on use of the latest Google Earth Engine (GEE), QGIS, ERDAS 
IMAGINE, and ArcGIS software. It will also look into application of remote sensing imagery 
in soil and water analysis, overlaying data retrieved from different subject areas of 
engineering, lidar imagery and other GIS data. 
List of Experiments on Surveying Based Laboratory: 
1. To assess the distance between two inaccessible points in a specific area using a
compass as well as plotting the area using closed traverse (prismatic compass).
2. To solve two-point, and three-point problems using plane table survey.
3. To understand differential levelling, vertical/cross sectional plotting and contouring
using automatic levellers.
4. To survey a nearby plot bounded by any polygon using a theodolite and also to perform
trigonometric levelling to find the characteristics of a nearby building.
5. To plot a known area using GPS measurements and assess the accuracy of the
measurement
6. Using total station to combine electromagnetic distance measurement and electronic
theodolite to understand the ramp in the institute and their geomet rical features with
high accuracy.
List of Experiments in GIS Laboratory: 
1. To create a map of any area using vector data models using available ground data.
2. To perform geo-referencing when coordinate values are not given.
3. To study terrain data such as slo pe, aspect, and hill shade. How to use these for
representation of different social/service as well as frequency of different aspects
concerning demographic data.
4. To create a stream network or perform stream order generation or delineate watersheds
created by a water body using DEM files.
5. To perform site suitability analysis for a service building (example hospital) near to a
agricultural and inhabited land near an arid village at the edge of an oasis near Jodhpur.
6. Basic experiments on image sharpening a nd image resolution using ARC GIS/ ERDAS
IMAGINE processing tool.
Text Books 
1. John R. Jenkins, Remote Sensing of the Environment: An Earth Prespective
2. Lillesand, T.M., Kiefer, R.W. & Chipman, J.W. 2008. Remote Sensing and Image
Interpretation, 6th Edition, John Wiley and Sons.
Reference Books 
1. Floyd F. Sabins, Remote Sensing: Principles and Applications (3rd edition), Publisher
: Waveland Press, Edition : 3 rd, Print ISBN : 9781577665076, 1577665074, eText
ISBN : 9781478618171.0
2. Gopi, S., Sathikumar, R., and Madhu, N., Advanced Surveying: Total Station, GIS
and Remote Sensing, Pearson, 2007, Dorling Kindersley (India).ISBN 978 -81-3017-
0067-9.
3. Barrett, E.C. & Curtis, L.F. 2007. Introduction to Environmental Remote Sensing,
Routledge Publisher.
Climate Change and Impact 
Title Climate Change and Impact Number 
Department Civil and Infrastructure 
Engineering 
L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type Specialization 
Stream Elective 
Prerequisite 
Objectives 
1. To gain understanding of scientific foundation and key concepts of atmospheric
science, climate data collection and impacts of GHGs.
2. To develop scientific basis of our understanding of climate system and climate change,
and associated uncertainties.
3. To provide knowledge on the impacts of climate change on natural world in the current
scenario and coming centuries.
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to achieve proficiency in: 
1. Understanding present climate system in the context of Earth’s history, reconstructing
climate evolution and relevant scientific uncertainties.
2. Developing basics of climate change science with key concepts of climate, weather,
energy balance and GHG effect.
3. Understanding energy flows within Earth-Atmosphere system.
4. Explaining the large -scale atmosphe ric circulations with underlying fluid mechanics
principles and role of oceans in climate variability.
5. Developing scientific understanding of climate forcing, sensitivity and feedback systems.
6. Understanding the basics of energy balance models and fundamental equations of Global
Circulation Models for simulating and estimating past and future climate systems.
7. Understanding the potential impacts of climate change and future climate change
projections.
Contents 
Introduction to Climate and Climate Change: Evolution of Earth’s climate: history, 
Instrumental and paleoclimatic record, Climate Change:  Definition, Components of climate 
system, Global energy balance, GHGs and Greenhouse effect [Lectures 5]. 
Radiative Energy Transfer: Radiation laws,  Radiation Proces ses, Absorption and 
Scattering by Gases and Particles, Solar Zenith Angle and Aerosol Optical Depth, Radiative 
Transfer Equation [Lectures 5]. 
Convection and Atmospheric Circulation:  Dry and moist convection,  Atmospheric 
convection and types, Scales of motion, Energy and Momentum Transport [Lectures 7]. 
Oceanic Circulation: Physical characteristics of ocean, Energy transport mechanism: Wind 
driven circulation theories, and thermohaline circulation [Lectures 4]. 
Climate sensitivity and feedback mechanisms: Equilibrium Climate sensitivity,  
Transient Climate Response, Feedback: Concept, Fast and slow feedback 
mechanisms/Processes, Climate sensitivity estimates [Lectures 5]. 
Climate Variability: Buffering atmospheric temperature changes, Atmosphere -ocean 
coupling: El Nino and Southern Oscillations [Lectures 3]. 
Climate modeling: One layer energy balance model, 1D EBM, Global Circulation Model, 
difference between Weather forecast models and GCMs [Lectures 8]. 
Climate Change Impacts and future projections: Sea level rise, Ecosystem and 
biodiversity, Shifting water resources, Agricultural impacts, severe weather impacts and 
Human health; Impact assessment of GHGs on global temperature, rainfall and drought 
patterns, atmospheric circulation. [Lectures 5]. 
Text Books 
1. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics- From Air Pollution to Climate Change, J. H. Seinfeld
and S. N. Pandis, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., Third Edition, 2013.
2. Fundamentals of Atmospheric modeling, Marck Jacobson, Cambridge University Press,
Second Edition, 2005.
3. Air Pollution and Global Warming: History, Science and Solutions, Mark Jacobson,
Cambridge University Press, Second Edition, 2012.
4. Atmosphere, Ocean, and Climate Dynamics, John Marshall ad R. Alan Plumb, Elsevier
Academic Press, 2008.
Online course Material 
 https://courses.edx.org/courses/course-v1:SDGAcademyX+CCSI001+3T2019/course/ 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/119106008/ 
Environmental Economics and Management 
Title Environmental Economics 
and Management 
Number 
Department (i) Civil and Infrastructure
Engineering
(ii) School of Management and
Entrepreneurship
L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type Specialization 
Stream Elective 
Prerequisite 
Objectives 
1. To introduce the methods used by Economists in analyzing environment related
issues.
2. To introduce concepts of positive and normative aspects of Environmental
Economics.
3. To provide knowledge on different approaches such as Regulations and Incentive
based Programs used in controlling pollution.
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to achieve proficiency in: 
1. The students are expected to achieve proficiency in:
2. Explaining the interactions between the economy and environment.
3. Understanding the concepts of market failure and their role in determining the level
of environmental quality.
4. Understanding the role of costs and benefits in environmenta l decision -making
processes.
5. Explaining the conceptual framework and theoretical basis of economic valuation
research
6. Recognizing and implementing the most appropriate techniques while performing
economic valuation research.
7. Employing regulatory tools to deal with pollution control.
Contents 
Introduction: The environment and economics, Cost of Environmental Protection, Positive 
and Normative Analysis [Lectures 4]. 
Principles of Environmental and Resource Economics: Markets and Market Failure, 
cost-benefit analysis [Lectures 10]. 
Economic Valuation: Random utility modes in environmental valuation, Hedonic Price 
Method, Defensive Expenditures and the Travel Cost Method, Contingent Valuation [Lectures 
10]. 
Controlling Pollution: : Regulation, Pigouvian Fees/ Emission Fees & Marketable permits, 
Property Rights and Marketable Permits, Regulation over Time and Space/ Transboundary 
Pollution, Regulations under Uncertainty ( Regulating Polluters with Unknown Costs) 
[Lectures 12]. 
Life Cycle Assessment of Products, Processes and Services; Special topics and case studies 
on environmental economics; Environmental Justice and Environmental Ethics; 
Environmental Movement; Environmental Activism [Lectures 6]. 
Text Books 
1. Environmental Economics, Charles. D. Kolstad, Oxford University Press, Second Edition,
2011.
2. Environmental Economics in Theory and Practice, N. Hanley, J. F. Shorgen, B. White,
Macmillan.
Environmental Hydrology 
Title Environmental Hydrology Number 
Department Civil and Infrastructure 
Engineering 
L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-2 [4]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type Specialization 
Stream Elective 
Prerequisite 
Objectives 
1. To provide qualitative understanding of hydrologic processes.
2. To inculcate basic steps of quantifying hydrologic parameters.
3. To enable design structures for water and soil management.
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to achieve proficiency in: 
1. Enable to develop and design flood management solutions, wetlands and landscapes.
2. Ability to design hydraulic structures and processes
3. Able to predict and assess the impact of precipitation, and effectively use water for
different services such as in agriculture
Contents 
Hydrological cycle, climate and society : Water food industry nexus, transport from 
precipitation to ground water, modeling hydrologic cycles and basic hydrologic data  
[Lectures 5]. 
Precipitation: Forms of precipitation, its causes, measurement of precipitation, data of 
precipitation, precipitation trends and frequencies, depth -duration-frequency of 
precipitation, Probability of precipitation occurrence [Lectures 7]. 
Infiltration and soil Moisture Management: Soil properties, soil -water balance, 
infiltration and its estimation, evaporation and its estimation, evapo -transpiration (ET) and 
its measurement and estimation, Crop referenced ET [Lectures 7]. 
Runoff: Why Runoff, Factor affecting Run off and flow models, watershed, Hydrograph and 
its components, peak run off and storm water run off, flood and its estimation, catchment 
character, agricultural and sub-surface drainage [Lectures 5]. 
Streams : Streams, Temporal and spatial streams, Stream Biota and Order, Measurement 
of stage and Velocity, stream stability and sediment transport, Meander migration, Flood 
plains, Stream Classification - Mountain Stream and Rosen stream methods, Channel 
evolution, Losing and gaining str eams Unit hydrograph, flood frequency, Gumbel and Type 
III distribution studies [Lectures 8]. 
Floods and Hydraulic Control Structures: open channel flows, Darcy Weisbach and 
Manning equations, weirs, flumes, conduits, culverts, riffles, pools and runs [Lectures 5]. 
Hydrology of Wetlands and in Ground Water - Detention and Retention ponds, 
Agricultural impacts and Brackish systems, Filter Strips, Riparian Buffers and Ditches. 
Leachate impact, sub -surface water, aquifers, wells, recharge, ground water mapping 
[Lectures 5]. 
Experimental Outline- Modeling 
1. Use the local historical precipitation data of Jodhpur and find the probability
distribution function, which can effectively predict it.
2. Use the local precipitation data as an input to derive synthetic mass curves. Further,
utilize the data to calculate runoff and land use. Use HydroCAD v.9.0.
3. Model a drainage management scenario of a porous tile of 10 cm diameter running
at the boundary between 1ft loamy soil from the atmosphere and 1ft sandy soil below
the porous tile. The ponding is 1ft height in an area of 1 acre. Use Ansys Fluent and
MicroFEM, and compare the results.
4. Create a new numerical groundwater flow model with MODFLOW-2005 / MODFLOW-
NWT, having confined aquifer at 80 m depth from soil surface. Impor t the data
(shapefiles, images, spreadsheets) from crop.xls; Use uniform percolation of 1ft per
acre as inflow, which can be manual input data to MODFLOW; link packages with
their parameters; run a simulation; visualize and export the results.
5. Use Hydrus 2D to simulate the water potential about the 25 cm larger and 15 cm
smaller external diameter of a porous frustum of 0.25 cm thickness leaching out
saline solution of 2000 ppm (brackish irrigation water) and train the model using a
Python program to handle different concentrations of salinity. Input training data
from the field experiments collected after soil analysis at Site C, IIT Jodhpur.
6. Using the results of water potential from Experiment 5 and estimate net infiltration
below the root zone if the crop is Okra. Use Crop ET reference values from Frangmeier
et al. 2015. Use INFIL 3.0 for the simulations.
7. Derive approximate flow effectiveness of a trapezoidal notch of 2.5 m base and 4.5
m surface with a height of 1m using OpenFlow Flow Master and compare the results
with Channeldesign and Channel Studio.
8. Use EPANET to evaluate water distribution of a community of 200 households with
an average consumption of 300 litres of water per day living at a height of 20 m from
ground level. These 200 household are supplied water from a 50 m high tank using
a given distribution plan. Refer lecture notes for the approximate length of 200 m.
Find the energy expense for distributing the water if the water tank is having 15 m
diameter and 10 m height.
Text Books 
1. Environmental Hydrology, Andy D. Ward, Stanley W. Trimble, Suzette R. Burckhard,
John G. Lyon, CRC Press, Third Edition, ISBN -13: 978 -1466589414, ISBN -10:
1466589418, 2016.
2. Engineering Hydrology K Subramanya, Fourth Edition, McGraw Hill Education (India),
Pvt, Ltd., New Delhi ISBN 1-25-902997-2, 978-1-25902997-4, 2013.
Environmental Biotechnology and Bioremediation 
Title Environmental Biotechnology 
and Bioremediation 
Number 
Department (i) Civil and Infrastructure
Engineering
(ii) Bioscience and
Bioengineering
3-0-2 [4]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type (i) Specialization
Stream Elective for
Civil Engineering,
(ii) Program
Elective for
Bioscience and
Bioengineering
Prerequisite 
Objectives 
1. Acquaint students with the way wastes/wastewaters as well as toxic wastes are
treated.
2. Teach methods pertaining to sustainable wastewater recycling
Learning Outcomes 
The Instructor will: 
1. Acquaint students with the way wastes/wastewaters as well as toxic wastes are
treated.
2. Teach methods pertaining to sustainable wastewater recycling
Contents 
Introduction: Basics of Microbiology, Stoichiometry and Bacterial energetics [Lectures 5]. 
Kinetics and Reactors:  Microbial Kinetics and Biofilm kinetics, Reactor types, Mass 
balances [Lectures 7]. 
The activated sludge process: Characteristics of activated sludge, Process configurations, 
Design and operating criteria, aeration systems and sludge separation [Lectures 5]. 
Nitrification and denitrification: Bacterial physiology and basic process including biofilm 
and hybrid [Lectures 4]. 
Phosphorus removal:  Normal phosphorus uptake into biomass, precipitation and 
enhanced biological removal [Lectures 4]. 
Drinking water treatment:  Aerobic biofilm processes to remove biological instability, 
biodegradation and denitrification [Lectures 4]. 
Anaerobic treatment by methanogenesis:  Reactor configurations, Process chemistry 
and Microbiology, Process kinetics [Lectures 4]. 
Detoxification of hazardous chemicals:  Molecular recalcitrance, Biodegradation of 
problem environmental contaminants [Lectures 4]. 
Bioremediation: Scope and characteristics of contaminants, Biodegradability, Treatability 
studies, Engineering strategies for bioremediation, Biotechnological and genetics 
engineering approaches-creations of superbugs [Lectures 4]. 
Laboratory Experiments: Determining empirical formula for wastewater based on 
elemental analysis, Determining COD degradation rate using different electron acceptors, 
Determining the microbial growth rate in wastewater under oxic/anoxic conditions, 
Determining the % COD removal using batch & continuous process for simulated 
wastewater, Determining the effect of initial microbial load on COD removal rate, 
Determining the effect of C/N ratio on COD removal rate, determine the sludge 
bulking/good settling sludge, Performing biological nitrification, Biological denitrification, 
Biofilm process for water treatment, Setting up bio electrochemical system for 
simultaneous C, N removal, Acclimatizing microbial consortia for treatment of hazardous 
waste, Setting up an in situ bioremediation system 
Text Books 
1. Environmental Biotechnology: Principles and Applications, Rittmann, B.E., McCarty,
P.L., Tata McGraw Hill, 2001.
Reference Books 
1. Bioprocess Engineering: Basic Concepts, Shuler, M., Kargi, F., Second  Edition Prentice
Hall, 2002.
2. General Microbiology, Stanier, R. Y., W.H. Freeman and Co, 2009.
Online course material 
1. Gargi Singh, Applied Environmental Microbiology, NPTEL Course Material, Department
of Civil Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee,
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/105107173/
 Machine Learning for Environmental Engineering 
Title Machine Learning for 
Environmental Engineering 
Number 
Department Civil and Infrastructure 
Engineering 
3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type Specialization 
Stream Elective 
Prerequisite Statistics for Environmental 
Engineering 
Anti-requisite Machine Learning-I 
Objectives 
1. To introduce students to various multivariate data analysis tools to deal with multi -
dimensional data.
2. Appreciate the areas of Environmental Engineering problems and issues where they can
be effectively applied.
Learning Outcomes 
The students will be able to: 
1.  Identify appropriate multivariate data analysis techniques.
2.  Develop a good understanding of the conceptual framework of how these multivariate
techniques work and applied.
Contents 
(Fractal 1) CSL7XX1: Machine Learning I: Supervised Learning 1-0-0[1] 
Introduction: Motivation, Different types of learning, Linear regression, Logistic regression 
[Lectures 2]. 
Gradient Descent:  Introduction, Stochastic Gradient Descent, Subgradients , Stochastic 
Gradient Descent for risk minimization [Lectures 2]. 
Support Vector Machines:  Hard SVM, Soft SVM, Optimality conditions, Duality, Kernel 
trick, Implementing Soft SVM with Kernels [Lectures 4]. 
Decision Trees: Decision Tree algorithms, Random forests [Lectures 2]. 
Neural Networks:  Feedforward neural networks, Expressive power of neural networks, 
SGD and Backpropagation [Lectures 3]. 
Model selection and validation:  Validation for model selection, k -fold cross-validation, 
Training-Validation-Testing split, Regularized loss minimization [Lecture 1]. 
(Fractal 2) CSL7XX2: Machine Learning I: Unsupervised Learning and Generative 
Models 1-0-0[1] 
Nearest Neighbour: k-nearest neighbour, Curse of dimensionality [Lecture 1]. 
Clustering: Linkage-based clustering algorithms, k -means algorithm, Spectral clustering 
[Lectures 3]. 
Dimensionality reduction:  Principal Component Analysis, Random projections, 
Compressed sensing [Lectures 2]. 
Generative Models: Maximum likelihood estimator, Naive Bayes, Linear Discriminant 
Analysis, Latent variables and Expectation -maximization algorithm, Bayesian learning 
[Lectures 5]. 
Feature Selection and Generation:  Feature selection, Feature transformations, Feature 
learning [Lectures 4]. 
(Fractal 3) Application to Environmental Data 1-0-1 [1]: Assessment of Surface water 
quality parameters; Assessment of Landfill leachate treatment; Air Quality Assessment and 
source recognition; Spatial differences in river estuaries and possible sources, Miscellaneous 
case studies [Lectures 14]. 
Text Books 
1. Applied Multivariate Statistical Analysis, Johnson, R. A. and Wichern, D. W., Pearson
Prentice Hall, Sixth Edition, 2007.
2. Multivariate Statistical Methods: A Primer, Manly, B. F. J., Chapman and Hall/CRC, Third
Edition, 2005.
3. Applied Multivariate Statistical Analysis, Wolfgang, K. H. and Leopold, S., Springer,
Fourth Edition, 2015.
4. Understanding Machine Learning: From Theory to Algorithms, Shalev -Shwartz,S., Ben-
David,S., Cambridge University Press, 2014.
5. Applied Statistics for Environmental Science with R, Alkarkhi, A. F. M. and Alqaraghuli,
W. A. A., Elsevier, ISBN 978-0-12-818622-0.
Reference Books 
1. Mitchell Tom (1997). Machine Learning, Tata McGraw-Hill
Online course material
https://online.stat.psu.edu/stat505/ 
Self Learning Material 
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, 
https://see.stanford.edu/Course/CS229 
Statistics for Environmental Engineering 
Title Statistics for Environmental 
Engineering 
Number 
Department Civil and Infrastructure 
Engineering 
3-0-2 [4]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type Specialization 
Stream Elective 
Prerequisite 
Objectives 
1. To provide a broad understanding of statistical methods and techniques of
experimental design in various environmental and industrial applications.
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to achieve proficiency in: 
1. Implementing appropriate statist ical procedures for data interpretation.
2. Applying and extending the understanding of statistical principles to existing as well as
new environmental issues and techniques.
3. Designing and conducting experiments to support environmental decisions.
Contents 
Statistics and Probability: Descriptive Statistics; Probability concepts and Conditional 
Probability; Bayes theorem, Probability distributions, Chebyshev’s Theorem, Central limit 
Theorem [Lectures 5].  
Fundamentals of data analysis:  Types of da ta, Precision measurements: accuracy, 
precision, resolution, repeatability, reproducibility, consistency, Odds Ratio, systematic 
and random errors, error estimation, error propagation, Outliers and its robustness 
[Lectures 4]. 
SAMPLING DESIGN AND STATISTICAL INFERENCE 
Concepts of sampling and monitoring: Simple random, systematic, ranked, stratified, 
composite and cluster sampling; sampling from normal distribution, Ranked set sampling, 
sampling in wild (quadrant, Recapture, transect) Completely randomized design, 
randomized block design; Control charts [Lectures 3]. 
Estimation of parameters and intervals:  mean, variance, population size, 
proportion/ratio, interval estimation, maximum likelihood method [Lectures 4]. 
Hypothesis testing (3): Null and alternative hypothesis, Type -I and II errors, one-tail 
and two-tail tests for mean and proportion (one - and two-population), inferences about 
population variance, goodness of fit (Kolmogorov -smirnov test, Anderson Darling t est), 
Man Whitney test, Wald statistic [Lectures 7]. 
Regression Analysis: Simple linear regression, Assumptions, Least square estimation, 
Significance testing, Residual analysis, Multiple regression, Regression comparison, 
Selection of variables, Categorical variables [Lectures 6].  
ADVANCED DATA TYPES AND HANDLING 
Spatial analysis for Environmental Processes: Spatial point process models, Spatial 
sampling and design [Lectures 3].  
Time series analysis (3):  time and frequency domain, auto -correlation, tests for 
randomness, cross-correlation [Lectures 3].  
SPECIAL TOPICS 
ANOVA: Experimental design and variance analysis (completely randomized and 
randomized block design, F-test, Fischer’s LSD, Cochrans Q test) [Lectures 3]. 
Analysis of ranked data: Introduction, Log rank test, spearman rank correlation, 
Wilcoxin Signed rank test [Lectures 2]. 
Monte Carlo methods, Toxicology concerns, Quantal response [Lectures 2]. 
Computational Lab (Matlab/R or any statistically computing environment) 
Introduction to R/Matlab 
Probability distributions and sampling 
Monte Carlo Method 
Maximum likelihood basics 
Regression 
Interval estimation 
Dose-Response relationship 
Spatial and time series exploratory data analysis 
ANOVA 
Text Books 
1. Environmental Statistcis- Methods and Applications, V. Barnett, John Wiley and Sons,
Inc., 2004.
2. Statistics for Environmental science and Management, B. F. J. Manly, Chapman and
Hall/CRC Press, Second Edition, 2008.
3. Probability, Statistics and Reliability for En gineers and Scientists, Ayyub, B. M. and
McCuen, R.H., Boca Raton: CRC Press, 2011.
References 
1. Ang, A. H -S. and W. H. Tang, Probability Concepts in Engineering: Emphasis on
Applications to Civil and Environmental Engineering, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., USA, Second
Edition, 2006.
2. Benjamin, J.R. and Cornell, C.A., Probability, Statistics and Decision for Civil Eng ineers,
McGraw-Hill, New York, 2014.
Geomorphology 
Title Geomorphology Number 
Department Civil and Infrastructure 
Engineering 
3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type Specialization 
Stream Elective 
Prerequisite 
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. Introduction to different geological processes behind observed geomorphological
features.
2. Complete understanding of depositional and erosional landforms created in different
environments.
3. Knowledge of natural hazards and application of geomorphology in managing them.
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the: 
1. Understanding of physics and chemistry of geological processes and their
interrelationship.
2. Knowledge of spatial and temporal evolution of different landforms.
3. Knowledge of geological hazard identification, risk assessment, and mitigation.
Contents 
Introduction to Geomorphology:  Introduction to geomorphology and physical geology; 
Earth’ components: atmosphere, lithosphere, hydrosphere, biosphere; The age of the earth: 
absolute dating methods; relative dating methods; Geological time scale [Lectures: 4] 
Weathering and Mass Wasting: Types of weathering: physical, mechanical, chemical, and 
biological; Rates of weathering; The stability of minerals; Weathering of common rocks; 
Mass wasting processes; Factors responsible for mass wasting [Lectures: 4] 
Fluvial Geomorphology:  Development stages of a stream; Classification of streams; 
Genetic classification of streams;  Stream channels; Channel geomorphology; Drainage 
basin and system; Basin morphology; Geological work of streams; Fluvial landforms. 
[Lectures: 5] 
Desert Geomorphology: Process of wind erosion; Sediment transport by wind; Erosional 
landforms; Depositional landforms; Desert and desert types; Surface processes and desert 
landforms; Aridity. [Lectures: 4] 
Glacial Geomorphology: Formation of glaciers; Glacier movement; Glaci er types; Glacial 
processes; Erosional landforms; Depositional landforms. [Lectures: 4] 
Coastal Geomorphology:  Ocean waves, currents and tides; Oceanic sediments; Shore 
processes; Coastal erosion and sediment transport; Depositional features formed by waves. 
[Lectures: 5] 
Tectonic Geomorphology:  Continental drift and evidences; Plate tectonics; Continental 
crust and plate tectonics; Causes of plate tectonics; geomorphics markers; Paleoseismology; 
Deformation and landscape responses. [Lectures: 4] 
Earthquakes: Location of an earthquake; Measurement and classification; The cause of 
origin; Spatial and temporal distribution of earthquakes; Earthquake hazard. [Lectures: 4] 
Volcanoes: Magma and lava flows; Global distribution of volcanoes; Classification of 
volcanoes; Modes of eruption; Volcanic Explosivity Index; Volcanic landforms; Submarine 
volcanoes. [Lectures: 4] 
Applied Geomorphology: Geomorphological hazard; Hazard assessment for risk analysis 
and risk management; Geomorphic hazards and sustainable developm ent; Geomorphology 
and disaster prevention. [Lectures: 4] 
Text Books 
1. Sreepat Jain (2014) Fundamental of Physical Geology. Springer. ISBN 978-81-322-1539-
4.
2. Richard J. Huggett (2007). Fundamentals of Geomorphology (2nd Ed). Taylor & Francis
Group. ISBN 978-0-203-94711-1 ebk.
Additional Reading 
1. Douglas W. Burbank, Robert S. Anderson (2011) Tectonic Geomorphology (2nd Ed).
Wiley-Blackwell; ISBN: 978-1-444-33886-7
2. Ro Charlton (2007) Fundamentals of Fluvial Geomorphology (1st Ed). Taylor & Francis
Group. ISBN: 9780203371084
3. Eric C. F. Bird (2008) Coastal Geomorphology: An Introduction (2nd Ed). Wiley. ISBN:
978-0-470-51729-1
4. Anthony J. Parsons, A. D. Abrahams (2009) Geomorphology of Desert Environments.
Springer. ISBN 978-1-4020-5719-9
5. I Alcántara-Ayala, A. Goudie (Eds.). (2010). Geomorphological Hazards and Disaster
Prevention. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511807527
Environmental Impact Assessment 
Title Environmental Impact 
Assessment 
Number 
Department (i) Chemical Engineering
(ii) Civil and Infrastructure
Engineering
3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type (i) Programme
Elective for
Chemical
Engineering, (ii)
Specialization
Stream Elective for
Environmental
Engineering
Prerequisite 
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. Impart the knowledge to the students with the methods of assessment of
environmental impacts due to developmental and industrial activities.
2. Expose the students with the EIA regulations and EMP.
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the: 
1. In-depth knowledge of the methods of assessment of environmental impacts due to
developmental and industrial activities.
2. In-depth knowledge of EIA regulations and EMP.
Contents 
Introduction to EIA; definitions and concepts; e volution of EIA; historical development of 
EIA; forecasting environmental changes; strategic environmental assessment;  ISO 
provisions, environmental clearance procedure [Lectures 11]. 
EIA documentation and processes; preliminary stages of EIA; project type s and screening; 
impact prediction; evaluation and mitigation; EIA monitoring and auditing. [Lectures 11]. 
EIA regulations; TOR for EIAs; environmental indices, EIA at regional level, sectoral level, 
and policy level; sustainable development; Environmental Management Plan (EMP) [Lectures 
11]. 
Future strategies and EIA case studies [Lectures 9]. 
Text Books 
1. Canter, L., Environmental Impact Assessment, McGraw Hill, New York, 1996.
Reference Books 
1. World Bank, ‘Environmental Assessment Source Book’, Environment Dept., Washington
D.C., 1991.
2. Rau, G.J. and Wooten, C.D., Environmental Impact Analysis Handbook, McGraw Hill,
New York, 1980. Preventive environmental management.
Online course Material 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/127105018/ 
Ecological Engineering 
Title Ecological Engineering Number 
Department Civil and Infrastructure 
Engineering 
3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type Specialization 
Stream Elective 
Prerequisite 
Objectives 
1. To provide the basics of physical and ecologic processes.
2. To apply natural processes to guide restoration and creation of ecosystems.
3. To inculcate the fundamental design considerations of ecologically engineered systems.
Learning Outcomes 
1. To be able to identify the ecological processes occurring within ecosystems.
2. To apply physical and biogeochemical processes to provide societal services.
3. Identify the benefits of ecological engineering technologies.
Contents 
Ecosystem: Ecological Engineering Introduction, Definitions and Principles, Ecosystems and 
their services, their importance for animal and human development, Introduction of Energy 
as an accounting system [Lectures 6] 
Valuation: Ecosystem Valuation, Natural Capital of precipitation, Systems Approach: 
Bioenergy Analysis, Life cycle analysis, Its application of natural resource pathways such as 
water, minerals, Energy analysis and application framework, Mesocosm and its application 
[Lectures 7] 
Natural Treatment Systems: Wetlands, Constructed Wetlands, wetland dynamics, Soil 
infiltration based microbial water treatment, biological water treatment systems - 
aerobic/oxidation ditches/lagoons and Living Machines [Lectures 7]. 
Water Management using Green and Permeable Systems: Water Runoff and design 
for hydrologic control, Rain gardens, storm water management, permeable pavement and 
green roofs [Lectures 6]. 
Natural Restoration: Conceptual framework for restoration, Theory of ecological 
restoration, interface ecosystems, ecology and economics of restoration, Ecological Risk 
Assessment [Lectures 8]. 
Ecological Modelling: Green Infrastructure Placement on Neighbourhoods, Runoff, flood 
and other natural event simulation, introduction of infi ltration and soil -water analysis 
softwares, Case Studies in Ecological Restoration [Lectures 8]. 
Text Books 
1. Patrick Kangas, Ecological Engineering: Principles and Practice, Lewis Publishers, CRC
Press, ISBN-13: 978-1566705998 ISBN-10: 1566705991
2. Mitsch, W.J. and Jorgensen, S.E. 2004. Ecological Engineering: and Ecosystem
Restoration, John Wiley & Sons, New York.
References 
1. Glenn W. Suter II, Ecological Risk Assessment, 2016, 2 nd Edition, CRC Press, ISBN-13:
978-1566706346, ISBN-10: 1566706343
2. E.P. Odum (1969) The Strategy of Ecosystem Development. Science.
3. Reid et al., (2005). Ecosystems and human well -being: Synthesis. A report of the
millennium ecosystem assessment. Pages 1- 24.
Fate of Chemicals in the Environment 
Title Fate of Chemicals in the 
Environment 
Number 
Department Infrastructure Engineering 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type Specialization 
Stream Elective 
Prerequisite Chemistry, Flow Mechanics, 
Soils 
Objectives 
1. To provide qualitative understanding of of what happens to chemicals as it enters an
environment.
2. To inculcate the dynamics of chemicals as they interact with different phases during their
transport.
3. To inculcate different ways of chemical transport.
Learning Outcomes 
1. To enable identification of mass transport and distinguish various chemical
transformations.
2. Able to predict mobilizing and spreading of chemicals in a media or material or a volume
of air
3. Relate the general fate of contaminants when p assing through water, air and soil due to
forces such as precipitation.
Contents 
Basics of Mass transport: Continuity Thought of Chemicals; Earth’s Environmental 
Compartments, Lavosier species, Mass Balances, history of mass conservation, basic concept 
of chemical fate [Lectures 6]. 
Modes of Transport : Ficks law of diffusion, films and finite fluid layers, dispersion, 
advection of solutes and particles in fluids. Turbulent diffusion, f ilm theory, penetration, 
surface renewal, and boundary layer thought [Lectures 6]. 
Transformation and Phases: Phases, Partitioning coefficients, Aspects of Equilibrium with 
Dissociating chemicals, Partitioning in multi-component systems, Basics of fugacity-Mackay 
models [Lectures 6]. 
Soils: Soil and Its Functions, soil nutrients and contamination, Diffusion/advection equation 
for transport in soil, infiltration and leaching, evaporation and capillary transport,  Analytical 
Solutions for Vertical Transport in Soil [Lectures 6]. 
Precipitation and Streams: Land use, Hydrological Data, Hydrograph, Analytical Steady-
State Surface Water Model, Runoff, Streams, Mass Balances and Plug flow [Lectures 6]. 
Surface Waters : Wetlands, constructed systems, Mass balances on wetland systems, 
Nutrient loading criteria, Streeter -Phelps Equation, Waste Load allocation and Dissolved 
gases in river waters [Lectures 6]. 
Atmospheric Transport: Area and Point source of pollutants in a ir, box model for area 
source plume model for point sources, dry and wet deposition at surfaces or soil, uptake by 
plant roots, transpiration, metabolism and photo-degradation [Lectures 5]. 
Text Books 
1. Louis J. Thibodeaux, Environmental Chemodynamics: Movement of Chemicals in
Air, Water, and Soil, 2nd Edition,1996, ISBN: 978-0-471-61295-7
2. Stefan Trapp, and Michael Matthies, Chemodynamics and Environmental Modeling,
Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 1998, ISBN-13: 978-3-642-80431-1 e-ISBN-13:
978-3-642-80429-8
Open Source Models 
ICECRM 1.1 (indoor chemical exposure classification/ranking model) 
The CoZMoMAN Model- The Multimedia fate and transport models 
The Global Distribution Model (Globo-POP Version 1.1)- Global fate of organic chemicals 
NPTEL 
Dr Bhanu Prakash Vellanki,Environmental Remediation of Contaminated sites,  
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/107/105107181/, IIT Roorkee 
Dr Manoj Datta, Geoenvironmental Engineering, (Environmental Geotechnology); Landfills, 
Slury Ponds & Contaminated Sites, IIT Delhi 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/102/105102160/#
Contaminants Transport to Sub-surface Environments 
Title Contaminants Transport to 
Sub-surface Environments 
Number 
Department Infrastructure Engineering 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type Specialization 
Stream Elective 
Prerequisite Chemistry, Flow Mechanics, 
Soils 
Objectives 
1. To identify major chemical contaminants and their behaviour during precipitation and in
media.
2. To inculcate the predict techniques of pathways of contaminants in atmosphere, ground
water and other subsurface environments
3. To inculcate approaches for remediation, including their effects on contaminant fate and
transport
Learning outcomes
1. Able to predict and assess the role of water in influencing contamination
2. To engage in practical problem solving regarding subsurface contaminant issues.
3. Relate both organic and inorganic contaminants to their general fate
Contents: 
Atmosphere: Climates, circulations in the atmosphere, Natural and anthropogenic 
climatic changes, transport of chemicals and their reaction, Precipitation base d removal of 
chemical or contaminants [6] 
Mixing: Physical transport in surface waters, sediment transport, distribution of sediment, 
erosion due to water and its control, chemical concentration, dissolved oxygen, chemical 
distribution among phases, and air -water exchanges [6] 
Air based Circulations: Green house gases, global climatic change, global carbon box 
model, global Nitrogen and Sulphur cycle, erosion due to wind and its control [6].  
Subsurface Transport: Darcy’s law, contaminant solute transport equations, sorption, 
retardation, ground water movement, vadose zone dynamics, bioavailability, redox 
reactions [6] 
Soils: Salinity and Sodicity, their natural and anthropogenic causes, leaching and 
unsaturated zone mass transport, drainage and irrigation management, Soil based-waste 
water treatment, fate of waste water pollutants [6]. 
Metal Transport: Trace metals, Complexation, Solubility and adsorption, Metals in lakes, 
Metal migration in soils, Genesis of acid depositions, Acidity and Alkalinity, Metal  
deposition [6] 
Geological Aspects of Transport: Bio-geochemical models, Ecological Effects, Critical 
loads and Case Studies [6]. 
Text Books 
Jerald L. Schnoor, Environmental Modeling: Fate and Transport of Pollutants in Water, Air, 
and Soil, October 1996 704, ISBN: 978-0-471-12436-8 
Harold F. Hemond, Elizabeth J. Fechne, Chemical Fate and Transport in the Environment 
Academic Press; 3 edition (13 June 2014), 
Online Course Material 
Dr Bhanu Prakash Vellanki,Environmental Remediation of Contaminated sites,  
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/107/105107181/, IIT Roorkee 
Dr Manoj Datta, Geoenvironmental Engineering, (Environmental Geotechnology); Landfills, 
Slury Ponds & Contaminated Sites, IIT Delhi https://nptel.ac 
Indoor Air Pollution 
Title Indoor Air Pollution Number 
Department Civil and Infrastructure 
Engineering 
2-0-0 [2]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type Specialization 
Stream Elective 
Prerequisite 
Objectives 
1.  To develop understanding of the concepts of Indoor air pollution, sources and control
strategies.
2.  Discuss the sources of pollutants in buildings, human exposure assessment,
infectious disease transmission and risk analysis.
3.  To provide understanding of basic modeling concepts of indoor pollutant emission,
transport, and control.
 Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to achieve proficiency in: 
1.  Integrating indoor air quality & ventilation standard requirements in healthy building
design.
2.  Developing a broad overview of particle-phase, gas-phase, and biological pollutants
found in indoor environments.
3.  Analyzing pollution control technologies and their effectiveness.
 Contents 
Introduction: Indoor environment, Properties (Residential and Non -residential), 
Guidelines, Standards and Regulations, control strategies [Lecture 2]. 
Health Effects:  sick buildings, Human Exposure Assessment, Dose -Response 
Characteristics [Lecture 4]. 
Ventilation: Conventional and Advanced Ventilation systems, Air flow or pollution 
distribution, Air filtration strategies, General Ventilation and Well -Mixed Reactor model 
[Lecture 6]. 
Indoor air pollutants and control: Types and sources of pollutants (particles, gas-phase 
compounds, biological and radioactive), concentrations, properties, emission rates and 
emission factors, pollutant control/removal techniques [Lecture 6]. 
Gas and Particle phase pollutants:  Gas Phase: Source emission modeling, Reactive 
deposition, secondary organic aerosol formation; Particle Phase: Physical properties and 
aerosol dynamics, lung deposition [Lecture 6]. 
Disease transmission, risk and control:  Transmission modes, Infectious aerosol (Virus 
and bacteria) properties, Risk Estimation: Well's Riley Model, Control methods [Lectures 4]. 
Text Books 
1.  Indoor air quality handbook, Spengler, J., McCarthy, J., and Samet, J., McGrow -Hill
Professional, 2001.
2.  Indoor Air Quality Engineering - Environmental Health and Control of Indoor Pollutants,
Heinsohn, R. J. and Cimbala, J. M., Marcel Dekker, Inc., 2003.
3.  Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics- From Air Pollution to Climate Change, J. H. Seinfeld
and S. N. Pandis, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., Third Edition, 2013.
4.  Aerosol Technology-Properties, Behavior and Measurement of Airborne Particles, W. C.
Hinds, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., Second Edition, 1998.
5.  Organic Indoor Air Pollutants: occurrence, measureme nt, evaluation, Salthammer, T.
and Uhde, E., O., Wiley-VCH, 2009.
Environmental Microbiology 
Title Envrionmental Microbiology Number 
Department (i) Civil and Infrastructure
Engineering
(ii) Bioscience and
Bioengineering
2-0-0 [2]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type (i) Specialization
Stream Elective for
Civil Engineering,
(ii) Program
Elective for
Bioscience and
Bioengineering
Prerequisite 
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. Enable students utilize the knowledge of  Microbiology for environmental cycling and
enhanced agriculture productivity.
 Learning Outcomes 
The students will have an ability to: 
1. Understand the ecological interactions of Microbes in detail and will be able to associate
the structure and functio n of a particular microbial community in a particular
environment.
2. Understand the soil plant interactions, how microbes make nutrients available for plant
growth and how that helps in enhanced crop productivity.
 Contents 
Environmental and Agricultural microbiology: Microbial Ecology, Microbial  Evolution 
and Biodiversity, Interactions among Microbial Populations, Interactions between 
Microorganisms and Plants, Plant growth promoting bacteria, Microbial Interactions with 
Animals, Microbial Communities and Ecosystems, Measurement of Microbial Numbers, 
Biomass, and Activities, Effects of Abiotic Factors and Environmental Extremes on 
Microorganisms, Microorganisms in Their Natural Habitats: Air, Water, and Soil 
Microbiology, Biogeochemical cycling, soil, waste, water management, Microorganisms in 
Mineral and Energy Recovery and Fuel and Biomass Production [Lectures 28]. 
Text Books 
1. Microbial Ecology: Fundamentals and applications, Atlas, R.M., Bartha, R., Pearson,
2001.
2. Medical Microbiology, Jawetz, Melnick, Adelberg, 28th Edition McGraw Hill, 2018.
Reference Books 
1. Biology of Microorganisms, Brock, et al., Benjamin Cummings, Boston, MA, 13 th
edition, 2012.
2. Principles of Biochemistry, Lehninger, A., Nelson, D.L., Cox, M., W.H. Freeman and
Co., 2009.
Online course Material 
David Schauer, and Edward DeLong. 20.106J Systems Microbiology. Fall 2006. 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology: MIT OpenCourseWare, https://ocw.mit.edu. 
Biosafety and Public health 
Title Biosafety and Public health Number 
Department Civil and Infrastructure 
Engineering 
2-0-0 [2]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type Specialization 
Stream Elective 
Prerequisite 
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. Introduce students to the modern practices, systems and policies concerning human
health protection from exposure to harmful biological agents.
 Learning Outcomes 
The students will have an ability to: 
1. Understand national and international regulatory aspects of biosafety.
2. Conduct safe research while working with high risk biological agents and understand
the deliberate process of identifying biological hazards and design appropriate
strategies to reduce associated risk.
 Contents 
Biosafety: Introduction to biosafety; Basic principles of biosafety, Biosafety signs, 
Introduction to various regulatory bodies, statutory regulations, Biosafety cabinet, 
Containment of infectious microorganisms (bacteria, fungus, parasite, prions, viruses ) and 
hazardous biological materials; Methods of disposal-disinfection, sterilization by autoclaving, 
irradiation and incineration; Biosafety levels - BSL-1, 2, 3, 4 and integrated methods and 
equipments [Lectures 5]. 
Laboratory safety and storage, handling and transportation of biologically 
hazardous substances: Introduction to Good Laboratory Practices (GLP), Laboratory 
Safety Practices: Safety procedures, safety devices, fire safety, prevention and fighting, 
Hazardous material packaging, storage and transport [Lectures 7]. 
Safety, Health and Environmental Protection (SHE) and Occupational Safety and 
Health Administration (OSHA):  Statutory regulations in India and abroad, Security 
aspects, Codes and Standards, Present scenario and vision for future, OSHA; Applicable 
standards for safety, OSHAS 18000 [Lectures 4]. 
Hazards and Evaluation Techniques:  Material Safety Data Sheets, Properties, 
Toxicology, LD50, LD10, pathogenicity and biohazards associated with biomaterials, levels 
of biohazards [Lectures 5]. 
Risk Analysis: Risk Assessment, Dose-Response relationship, Exposure Assessment, Risk 
Management, Risk Communication, Risk Analysis methods: Process Hazard Analysis (PHA), 
Event Tree Analysis (ETA), Cause and Consequence Analysis (CCA), Failure Modes and 
Effects (FMEA), Fault Tree Analysis (FTA), Hazard and Operability Studies (HAZOPs) 
[Lectures 7]. 
Text Books 
1. Biological Safety: Principles and Practices, Wooley, D. P. and Byers, K. B., Washington
D.C.:ASM Press, Fifth Edition, 2017.
Reference Books 
1. Stanford University Biosafety Manual 2018, Environmental Health and Safety.
2. National Research Council 1989, Biosafety in the Laboratory: Prudent Practices for
Handling and Disposal of Infectious Materials, Washington D.C.-National Academy
Press, https://doi.org/10.17226/1197.
GIS and Public Health 
Title GIS and Public health Number 
Department Civil and Infrastructure 
Engineering 
3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type Specialization 
Stream Elective 
Prerequisite 
Objectives
The instructor will: 
1. Providing exposure to the application of GIS in infectious and vector -borne diseases
analysis.
2. Introducing techniques of GIS in management of health services.
 Learning Outcomes 
1. Ability to accurately model temporal and spatial distribution of health events.
2. Knowledge of surveillance and mapping techniques for infectious and vector -borne
diseases.
3. Ability to identify healthcare “shortage” areas and analysis of access to h ealthcare
services.
 Contents 
Geographic Information Systems: GIS functions; Trends in GIS applications; Public 
health application of GIS; GIS and the internet [Lectures 3]. 
Spatial data:  Field and object data; Tesselation  and vector data models; Measuring 
locations; Scale, projection, and symbols of cartographic data sources; Geographic data 
quality; Role of metadata [Lectures 3]. 
Spatial Databases for Public Health:  Foundation spatial data; population data; Health 
data; Making population and health data mappable; database integration; Data sharing 
[Lectures 3]. 
Mapping Health Information: Mapping process; representing health information; viewing 
health information; GIS and map publication [Lectures 3]. 
Analyzing Spatial Clustering of Health Events: Mapping disease rates; spatial clustering 
methods; space-time clustering; choosing a clustering method; uses of spatial clustering 
methods [Lectures 4]. 
Analyzing Environmental Hazards: Source location analysis; modelling of fate, transport, 
and environment quality; GIS and exposure modelling; GIS and dose; outcome surveillance; 
environmental risk management; issues in environmental health mapping and analysis 
[Lectures 5]. 
Analyzing the Risk and Spread of infectious Diseases: Spatial diffusion; mapping case 
distributions; mapping the ecology of risk; temporal and geographical trends in disease 
outbreaks; forecasting spatial diffusion of communicable diseases; planning public health 
interventions; privacy and confidentiality [Lectures 5]. 
Exploring the Ecology of Vector -Borne Diseases: Global burden of zoomatic diseases 
and the challenge of emerging infectious diseases; surveillance and mapping of vector-borne 
diseases; modelling of vector-borne diseases; environmental impacts of controlling vector -
borne diseases; systematic perspective on disease [Lectures 4]. 
Analyzing Access to Health Services:  mapping service locations; mapping health care 
needs and services; assessing potential access to health services; analysing service 
utilization [Lectures 4]. 
Locating Health Services:  health care shortage areas; components and dimensions of 
health service delivery systems; client population distribution; meaning of “centrality” in 
health service fa cility location; normative models of facility location and service delivery; 
incorporating normative models of facility location and service delivery into GIS; spatial 
decision support systems [Lectures 4]. 
Health disparities:  context and composition; visu alizing and measuring area 
characteristics; defining neighbourhood contexts; modelling neighbourhood effects on 
health; location processes and link between location and well-being [Lectures 4]. 
Text Books 
1. GIS and Public Health, Ellen K. Cromley, Sara L. McLafferty, Guilford Publications, Second
Edition, 2017, ISBN 978-1-60918-750-7.
2. GIS in Public Health Practice, Ravi Maheswaram, Massimo Craglia, CRC Press, 2004,
ISBN 0-415-30655-8.
Environmental and Health Risk Assessment 
Title Environmental and Health Risk 
Assessment 
Number 
Department Civil and Infrastructure 
Engineering 
3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type Specialization 
Stream Elective 
Prerequisite 
Objectives 
1. Introduction of basics of statistics in risk assessment and decision making.
2. Introduction of uncertainty and vulnerability in risk modelling.
3. Introduction to different risk assessment framework and elements of decision making for
risk management.
 Learning Outcomes 
1. Understanding of dose-response and exposure-response models.
2. Knowledge of data collection, uncertainty, and modelling of risk.
3. Ability to quantify vulnerability and uncertainty.
4. Knowledge of risk models related to infectious diseases and toxicological issues.
 Contents 
Decision making under uncertainty: Legal balancing of risks, economic costs, and 
benefits; Criteria for choices in risk management; Paradigm for decision -making; 
Probabilistic reasoning; Scales of measurement and  implications for risk analysis [Lectures 
4]. 
Risk, Cost, and Benefit Analysis (RCBA):  Cost-benefit analysis (CBA); Evaluating non -
market priced goods and services; Death or morbidity averted in RCBA; Intergenerrational 
equality; Subsidies and taxation  [Lectures 4]. 
Exposure-response models for risk assessment: Maximum Likelyhood Estimator (MLE); 
Basic statistical formulae; Empirical causal relations between exposure and response; 
Logistic regression; Poisson regression; Survival analysis; Cox proportional (relative r isk) 
hazards model; Time series analysis; Model selection [Lectures 4]. 
Probabilistic dose -response models and concepts of toxicology:  Risk assessment 
through dose-response modelling; Multistage dose -response models; Moolgavkar, Venzon, 
and Knudson Cancer  model; Other dose -response models; Be nchmark dose and 
concentration [Lectures 4]. 
Methods of quantification of variability and uncertainty:  Combinations of 
distributions; Monte Carlo method; Bootstrap methods; Markov chain monte carlo; Entropy 
of information [Lectures 4]. 
Casual models:  Influence diagrams; Bayesian networks; Classification and regression 
strategy  [Lectures 2]. 
Meta-analysis, pooling sample data, and statistical decision rules: Pooling several 
samples; Meta -analysis; Binomial population; Comparison of distributions; Statistical 
decision making; Analysis of variance; Kruskal-Wallis test; K independent samples  [Lectures 
4]. 
Contingency tables in risk assessment and management: Chi-squared test; Measuring 
agreement or conformity; sensitivity and specificity [Lectures 4]. 
Statistical associations and causation: Qualitative aspects of causal associations; 
Pearson’s coefficient of correlation; Additional measures of association; Cons istency of 
scientific studies; Causal diagram in modelling causation  [Lectures 4]. 
Risk assessment framework: Risk-based corrective action framework; US EPA Risk 
assessment framework; Selected probability distributions; Poisson process in risk 
assessment; Probabilistic risk assessment; Risk calculations in accident analysis; Simple 
dynamic model of infection; Toxicological modelling for risk assessment [Lectures 4]. 
Decisions for risk management: Representing risky choices; Practice of making risky 
decisions; Foundations of utility theory; Decision trees; Game theory [Lectures 4]. 
Text Books 
1. Paolo F. Ricci (2010) Environmental and health Risk Assessment and Management:
Principles and practices. Springer. ISBN-10 1-4020-3776-7 (e-book)
Environmental Engineering Laboratory 
Title Environmental Engineering 
Laboratory 
Number 
Department Civil and Infrastructure 
Engineering 
L-T-P-D [C] 1-0-4 [3]
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type Specialization 
Stream 
Elective 
Prerequisite 
Contents 
Sr. No. Experiment Laboratory 
1 Introduction to the requirements of National Accreditation 
Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories (NABL) 
accreditation of environmental laboratories 
2 Introduction to laboratory and preliminary examination of 
water (color, odor and taste) 
3 Determination of pH, alkalinity, turbidity and optimum 
coagulant dose, and conductivity 
4 Determination of solids (total, dissolved, organic, inorganic 
and settleable) and hardness 
5 Determination of chloride, sulphates and sulfide in water 
6 Determination of iron and manganese in water 
7 Determination of DO and BOD in wastewater 
8 Determination of nitrogen, phosphorus and fluoride in water 
9 Determination of free and combined residual chlorine in water 
10 Determination of coliforms in water 
11 Demonstration of Analytical Instruments: water –related 
12 Demonstration of Air (Particle and Gas-phase) and Noise 
Pollution Monitoring Devices 
13 Demonstration of Air Sampling Devices and Weather 
Monitoring Station 
Report on the Assessment of raw and treated water samples and efficacy of primary, 
secondary and tertiary treatment stages of a wastewater treatment plant. 
Text Books: 
Chemistry for Environmental Engineering, Sawyer, C.N., McCarty, P.L., and Parkin, 
G.F., Tata McGraw-Hill Publishing Company Limited, Fourth Edition, 2000.
Detailed course content of Program Electives  
Stability of Slopes 
Title Stability of Slopes Number 
Department Civil and Infrastructure 
Engineering 
3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type M.Tech Elective
Prerequisite 
Objectives 
1. To understand the influence of geology, rockmass  properties, and hydrology on the
stability of slopes.
2. To present basic types of analytical and numerical methods of slope stability analysis.
3. To introduce methods and instruments of slope monitoring and stabilization.
4. To enable planning and design of preventive measures, and redesign of failed slopes.
Learning outcomes 
1. Knowledge of data collection from field -work, aerial photography, geophysics, and
geological map.
2. Knowledge of kinematic analysis of slopes using geological data and stereographic
projection.
3. Knowledge of kinetic analysis of slopes and influence of critical geometrical and
hydrological parameters.
4. Knowledge of available methods of slope stabilization by reinforcements and rock
removal.
5. Knowledge of instrumental facilities to monitor  slope movement and subsequent
classification.
Contents 
Structural geology for slope analysis: Geological structures; Orientation of 
discontinuities; Introduction to geological maps; Identification of modes of slope instability 
[Lecture: 4] 
Site investigation and geological data collection: Site reconnaissance; Geological 
mapping; Spacing, persistence, and roughness of discontinuities; Probabilistic analysis of 
structural geology; Drilling and logging. [Lecture: 4] 
Rock strength properties:  Scale effect and rock strength; Shear strength of 
discontinuities; Laboratory testing of discontinuities; Hoek -Brown strength criterion for 
fractured rock mass; Rock durability and compressive strength [Lecture: 4] 
Plane failure: Conditions of plane failure ; Influence of groundwater on stability; Critical 
tension crack: identification and influence; Influence of critical slide plane inclination; 
Analysis of failure on a rough plane; Reinforcement of a slope; Seismic analysis of slopes  
[Lecture: 5] 
Wedge failure: Conditions of wedge failure; Wedge analysis including cohesion, friction, 
and water pressure; Wedge stability chart for friction; Compression wedge analysis [Lecture: 
5] 
Circular failure: Conditions of circular failure; Methods of analysis; Derivation  and use of 
circular failure charts; Location of critical slide surface and tension crack; Bishop’s and 
Janbu’s method of failure analysis. [Lecture: 6] 
Toppling failure:  Types of toppling failure; Kinematic analysis of block toppling failure; 
Limit equilibrium analysis of toppling [Lecture: 5] 
Stabilization of slopes:  Stablization programs: Rock slope Inventory, Hazard rating 
analysis; Stabilization by rock reinforcements; Stabilization by rock removal; Measures 
against rock fall [Lecture: 5] 
Movement moni toring: Types of slope movement: Initial response, Regressive and 
progressive movements, Long-term creep; Surface monitoring methods; Data interpretation 
[Lecture: 4] 
Text Books 
1. Duncan C Wyllie, Christopher W. Mah (2005) Rock Slope Engineering, 4th Ed, Spon Press
(Taylor & Francis Group), ISBN 0–415–28001–X (pbk).
2. Robin Chowdhury, Phil Flentje, Gautam Bhattacharya (2010) Geotechnical Slope Analysis.
CRC Press (Taylor & Francis Group), ISBN: 978-0-415-46974-6 (Hbk).
Rock Mechanics and Rock Engineering 
Title Rock Mechanics and Rock 
Engineering 
Number 
Department Civil and Infrastructure 
Engineering 
3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type M.Tech Elective
Prerequisite 
Objectives 
1. To understand fundamentals of stress -train behavior of isotropic and anisotropic rocks
under different conditions
2. To understand limits of rock strength and analysis of rock failure conditions
3. To understand the influence anisotropy under at different scales
4. Introduction of use of rock mechanics in tunneling, mining engineering, and reservoir
geomechanics
Learning outcomes 
1. Knowledge of geological and engineering classification of rocks.
2. Detailed knowledge of failure criteria and influence of ambient conditions
3. Knowledge of laboratory- and field-based stress measurement techniques
4. Understanding of isotropic and anisotropic rock deformation
5. Knowledge of tunneling in isotropic and anisotropic rocks
6. Knowledge of natural and artificial support system in underground excavations
7. Knowledge of wellbore stability and hydraulic fracturing
Contents 
Classification and index properties of rocks: Geological classification of rocks; Index 
properties of rocks; Porosity; Density; Hydraulic conductivity and permeability; Strength; 
Slaking and durability; Sonic velocity; Classification of rock masses [Lectures 4]. 
Rock strength and failure criteria: Modes of failure; Laboratory strength tests; Stress -
strain behaviors in compression; Application of complete stress -strain curve; The Mohr -
Coulomb failure criterion; Hoek-Brown failure criterion; Effect of size, water, and anisotropy 
on strength [Lectures 6]. 
Initial stresses in rocks and their measurement: Estimating the initial stresses; 
Techniques for measurement of in-situ stresses; Determination of SHmin from leak-off tests; 
Wellbore failure and the magnitude of SHmax; Drilling-induced tensile fracture and magnitude 
of SHmax; Estimation of rock strength from breakouts [Lectures 5]. 
Planes of weakness in rocks: Joint orientation; Joint roughness; Relationship between 
displacement and strength; Effect of water pressure [Lectures 5]. 
Deformability of rocks: Elastic and non -elastic behavior; Measurement of deformability 
properties by static tests; Measurement of deformability properties by dynamic 
measurement; Fractured rock; Influence of time on rock deformation [Lectures 6]. 
Rock mechanics for tunneling: Opening in competent rocks; Horizontally layered rocks; 
Rock with inclined layers; Plastic behavior around tunnels; Time dependent behavior of 
tunnels [Lectures 5]. 
Rock mechanics for mining engineering: Natural support: Pillar design approach, Pillar 
strength equation, Model of pillar failure, Pillar stabilization; Artificial support: Rock support 
interaction analysis, Classification, Primary reinforcement, Secondary support system; Rock 
blasting process, control, and optimization [Lectures 5]. 
Rock mechanics for hydrocarbon reservoir: Tectonic stress field; Pore pressure 
measurement; Mechanical properties and stress data from laboratory analysis and field data; 
Concepts of critically stressed crust; Basi cs of hydraulic fracturing; Wellbore stability 
[Lectures 6]. 
Text Books 
1. Richard E. Goodman (1989) Introduction to Rock Mechanics (2 nd Ed). Wiley. ISBN -
10: 0471812005.
2. Mark D. Zoback. (2007) Reservoir Geomechncs. Cambridge University Press. ISBN-
978-0-521-77069-9.
3. Debasis Deb, Abhiram Kumar Verma (2016) Fundamentals and Applications of Rock
Mechanics. PHI Learning Pvt. Ltd. ISBN-978-81-203-5182-0.
Onlin  Online course Material 
1. V. B. Maji. Rock Mechanics – Web course. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105106055/
Reliability Engineering 
Title Reliability Engineering Number CIE7XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure 
Engineering 
L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for B. Tech, M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD,
Ph.D
Type M.Tech Elective
Prerequisite Nil 
Objectives: 
This course aims at: 
1. Introducing basic principles of statistics, uncertainty and reliability analysis.
2. Enhancing engineering knowledge and specialist techniques to prevent/reduce the
likelihood of failures of structures.
3. Introduction of different methods of reliability analysis in Civil Engineering.
Learning Outcomes: 
The students will have the ability to: 
1. Analyze the statistical moments of input random variables and the output
performance function.
2. Determine the probability of failure, reliability index and safety factors of limit state
functions.
3. Analytical knowledge of different levels of reliability used for structures.
4. Perform reliability based design on different limit states.
5. Apply finite element based reliability analysis to structural components and
systems.
Contents: 
Introduction to Reliability Engineering: Concepts of structural safety, limit state and 
reliability; types of uncertainty; reliability analysis and its importance [Lectures 2]. 
Basics of statistics and probability: Basic statistics; theory of probability; probability 
distribution function; hypothesis testing [Lectures 3]. 
Resistance parameters and distributions: Statistics of material properties and strength; 
dimensional variations; allowable stresses [Lectures 3]. 
Simulation based study of structural safety: Monte Carlo method;  Latin hypercube 
sampling; advanced sampling techniques [Lectures 3]. 
Level 2 reliability methods: Basic variables and failure surface; fir st order second 
moment method [Lectures 3]. 
Gradient based methods: first and second order methods; independent, correlated, 
normal and non-normal random variables based limit states [Lectures 5]. 
Response surface based methods: Conventional response surface method; advanced 
response surface methods with examples [Lectures 4]. 
Reliability based design: Stochastic models of loads; determination of partial  safety 
factors; code calibration; safety checking format [Lectures 4]. 
Reliability of structural systems: System reliability – series and parallel; bounds on 
system reliability; modelling of structural systems [Lectures 3]. 
Advanced reliability methods: Importance sampling method; subset simulation method; 
stochastic response surface method [Lectures 3]. 
Brief on advanced topics: Fatigue reliability estimation; S -N curve approac h; time -
dependent reliability [Lectures 3]. 
Design optimization: Introducti on to the concept of design optimization; examples on 
solving reliability based design optimization problems [Lectures 3]. 
Application of reliability analysis and design: applications to steel, concrete, offshore 
structures etc. to determine probability of failure and safe design [Lectures 3]. 
Text Books: 
1. P. Thoft-Christensen and M.J. Baker (1982) Structural Reliability: Theory and its
Applications, Springer-Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg. ISBN 978-3-642-68699-3.
2. A.H.S. Ang and W. H. Tang (1984) Probability Concepts in Engineering Planning and
Design Vol. II Decision, Risk and Reliability, John Wiley and Sons, New York. ISBN
978-0-471-03201-4
3. P. Thoft-Christensen and Y. Murotsu (1986) Applications of Structural Systems
Reliability Theory, Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg. ISBN 978-3-642-82766-2.
4. O. Ditlevsen and H.O. Madsen (1996) Structural Reliability Methods, John Wiley &
Sons Ltd, Chichester. ISBN 978-0-471-96086-7.
5. S.-K. Choi, R.V. Grandhi and R.A. Canfield (2007) Reliability-based Structural
Design, Springer-Verlag, London. ISBN 978-1-84628-444-1.
6. R. Ranganathan (2011) Structural Reliability Analysis and Design (3rd Ed), Jaico
Publishing House, Mumbai. ISBN 81-7224-851-2.
7. R.E. Melchers and A.T. Beck (2018) Structural Reliability Analysis and Prediction
(3rd Ed), John Wiley and Sons Ltd, Hoboken, NJ. ISBN 978-1-119-26599-3.
Additional References: 
1. Reliability Engineering (2009) by Prof. G.L. Sivakumar Babu on NPTEL.
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/108/105108128/
2. Structural Reliability (2014) by Dr. Arunasis Chakraborty on NPTEL.
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/103/105103140/
3. Risk and Reliability of Offshore Structures (2016) by Prof. Srinivasan
Chandrasekaran on NPTEL. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/114/106/114106041/
Structural Dynamics 
Title Structural Dynamics Number CIE7XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure 
Engineering 
L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for B. Tech, M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD,
Ph.D
Type M.Tech Elective
Prerequisite Nil 
Objectives: 
This course aims at: 
1. Introducing the behaviour of structures (especially framed building) to various
dynamic loads, viz. earthquake, machine vibration etc.
2. Fundamental understanding to analyze structures subjected to dynamic excitation
and computing quantities like displacements, forces, stresses etc.
3. Analytical and numerical methods as well as procedures in a way that emphasize
physical insight.
4. Problem solving ability for dynamic response in Civil Engineering design.
Learning Outcomes: 
Students will have the ability to: 
 Establish dynamic equilibrium and equation of motion for structural systems.
 Analyze the dynamic response and stress generation in single and multi degree of
freedom systems for different types of loading.
 Implement the basis for the classical energy formulations in dynamical systems.
 Model structural damping and solve problems in frequency as well as time domain.
 Solve the eigenvalue problems and gain knowledge on its useful properties.
 Device methods to protect new and existing structures against seismic collapse.
 Apply the structural dynamics theory to real-world problems like seismic analysis
and design of structures.
Contents: 
 Basics of structural dynamics: Introduction to dynamic loading and response; types
of analysis - static and dynamic loads; degrees of freedom; lumped mass; types of
mass-spring-damper system; formulation of equation of motion for structural
dynamics using direct equilibration, principle of virtual displa cement and Hamilton’s
principle [Lectures 4].
 Free vibration of single degree of freedom (SDOF) system: Undamped free vibration
and its solution; natural period and frequency; energy in free vibration; damped free
vibration; types of damping; concept of logarithmic decrement [Lectures 4].
 Forced vibration of SDO F system: Undamped forced vibration and its solution;
amplitude and phase angle; dynamic amplification factor; damped forced vibration
[Lectures 3].
 Force transmission and vibration measurement: Resonant frequency and half power
band width; force transmis sion and isolation; design of vibration measuring
instruments [Lectures 3].
 Response to harmonic and periodic motions: Response of SDOF systems to harmonic
loads and periodic excitations; Fourier series representation [Lectures 4].
 Response to arbitrary motions: Response of SDOF systems to unit impulse excitation,
arbitrary force (solution using Duhamel's integral), step and ramp forces, rectangular
pulse and half sinusoidal waves [Lectures 4].
 Numerical methods of solution: Determining the dynamics resp onse using methods
such as time stepping methods, central difference method and Newmark's method
[Lectures 4].
 Response spectrum: Concept of response spectrum; uses of response spectrum;
complex frequency transfer function; development of tripartite plot;  base shear and
bending moment; response of structure in frequency domain [Lectures 4].
 Multi-degree of freedom (MDOF) systems: Equation of motion for MDOF system;
solution of equation, matrix properties; natural frequencies and mode shapes; static
condensation; modal orthogonality; mode superposition analysis of MDOF system;
approximate method for finding natural frequency [Lectures 5].
 Earthquake response of MDOF systems: Time history analysis; response spectrum
analysis [Lectures 2].
 Dynamic response of continuous systems: Vibration of continuous systems; axial
vibration of prismatic bar; flexural vibration of beams; shear and bending behaviour;
generalized SDOF [Lectures 3].
 Applications: Introduction to finite element method; formation of element stiffness,
mass and force matrices; examples for seismic analysis and response [Lectures 2].
Text Books: 
1. J.M. Biggs (1964) Introduction to Structural Dynamics, McGraw Hill, NY. ISBN 07-
005255-7.
2. R.W. Clough and J. Penzien (1993) Dynamics of Structures (2nd Ed), McGraw Hill
Inc Editor. ISBN 0-07-011392-0.
3. A.K. Chopra (2017) Dynamics of Structures Theory and Application to Earthquake
Engineering (5th Ed), Prentice Hall, NJ. ISBN 978-0-134-55512-6.
4. A.K. Jain (2017) Dynamics of Structures with MATLAB ® Applications, Pearson
Education, Chennai, India. ISBN 978-9-332-55855-7
5. M. Paz and Y.H. Kim (2019) Structural Dynamics Theory and Computation (6th Ed),
Springer Nature, Switzerland. ISBN 978-3-319-94742-6.
Additional References: 
1. Structural Dynamics (2012) by Dr. Pradipta Banerji on NPTEL.
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/101/105101006/
2. Structural Dynamics (2016) by Prof. Ramancharala Pradeep Kumar on NPTEL.
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/106/105106151/
3. Structural Dynamics for Civil Engineers - SDOF Systems (2019) by Prof. Riya
Catherine George on NPTEL. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/104/105104189/
Wind and Earthquake Engineering 
Title Wind and Earthquake Engineering Number 
Department Civil Engineering L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type M.Tech
Elective
Prerequisite 
Objectives 
1. To acquaint the students with the fundamental knowledge of wind and earthquake
engineering to pursue higher level courses/research on the wind and earthquake
engineering
2. To provide the requisite information on the above two subjects to the students to work
in design offices.
3. To impart the back ground materials for pursuing some courses offered in the fields of
specialization (cores).
Learning Outcomes 
1. Enable the students to apply the knowledge gained in solving practical problems.
2. Enable the students to analyze the collected wind and earthquake data for providing
systematic inputs to be used in practice.
3. To make the students capable of using the knowledge gained for wind a nd earthquake
hazard mapping.
Contents 
Atmospheric wind circulation, its mechanism, types of wind, wind measurements, wind 
characteristic, different ways to express wind energy, inputs required for the analysis of 
structures, aero dynamic and aero -elastic effects, aero elastic instabilities-flutter, galloping, 
torsional divergence, dynamics in the wind codes [lectures 20]. 
Inside of the earth and tectonic plate movement, major tectonic plates, fault lines, tectonic 
theory of the occurrence of the earthquak e, earthquake hazards, earthquake input for 
structural analysis, concept of the response spectrum, deterministic seismic analysis of 
structures, salient features of earthquake code [lectures 20]. 
Text Books 
1. Ghosh S K and Fanella D A, Seismic and Wind Desi gn of Concrete Buildings,
International Code Council-New York (2004).
2. Taranath B S, Wind and Earthquake Resistant Buildings: Structural Analysis and
Design, Marcel Dekker, New York (2004). 
Others: 
1. Datta T K, Seismic Analysis of Structures, John Wiley & Sons, New York (2010).
2. IS 1893 -Part-I, Criteria for Earthquake Resistant Design of Structures: General
Provisions and Buildings, Bureau of Indian Standards, New Delhi (2016).
Offshore Geo-technology 
Title Offshore Geo-technology Number CIVIL7XX0 
Department Civil Engineering L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech -Ph.D. [CIE] Type M.Tech
Elective
Prerequisite 
Objectives 
1. To familiarize students with the dynamics of offshore environment.
2. To introduce methods of soil and site investigation.
3. To introduce designs, types, and analyses of piled foundation, shallow foundation, and
anchoring systems.
4. To introduce specific consideration of soil structure interaction of on-bottom and pipelines
and risers.
5. To provide overview of geo-hazards.
Learning outcomes: 
1. Detailed knowledge of geophysical, geotechnical investigation, laboratory test and use
of centrifuge modelling.
2. Understanding of soil response under static and dynamic loads.
3. Knowledge of the analysis and design of shallow foundation, piled foundation, anchoring
system and on-bottom pipelines and risers.
4. Understanding of marine slope failure and slides.
Contents: 
Offshore environment: Marine geology, Plate tectonics, Continental self, Marine -
sediments, Geotechnical characteristics, Ocean wind and waves, currents, wave theories, 
hydrodynamic forces (Lectures 7). 
Offshore site and soil investigation: Geophysical and Geotechnical investig ations; Soil 
classifications and tests - undrained tri -axial compression test, undrained strength; cyclic 
loading test, failure under cyclic loading, Centrifuge modelling [Lectures 7]. 
Offshore foundations: Shallow and deep foundations and their applicatio ns, Design of  
offshore foundations as per API and DNV codes, Pile drivability and dynamic monitoring, 
Capacity of driven piles, Installation piled and shallow foundations in fine grained and 
permeable sediments, Stability of shallow foundations, Dynamic an alysis of vertical and 
inclined pile foundations, Impedance function of piles and frequency domain analysis 
[lectures 10]. 
Anchoring systems: Buoyant platforms and mooring systems, Mooring line analysis and 
forces on anchors, Types of anchors and their design;  API and DNV code provisions for 
anchor design, Dynamic effects on anchor and uplift of anchors, Dynamically penetrating 
anchors [Lectures 7]. 
Pipeline and riser geotechnics: Geotechnical inputs to pipeline design; Design issues and 
code provisions; Soil structure interaction for on -bottom pipelines and risers, Secondary 
stabilization [Lecture 6] 
 Offshore geo -hazard: Types of marine geo -hazard and their identification, Submarine 
slope failures and slides, probabilistic hazard analysis [Lectures 5]. 
Text Books: 
1. Mark Randolph, Susan Gourvenec (2011). Offshore Geotechnical Engineering. Spon
Press (Taylor & Francis), ISBN13: 978-0-415-47744-4(hbk).
2. Paolo Boccotti (2000). Wave Mechanics for Ocean Engineering (1 st Ed), Elsevier
Science. ISBN:  9780080543727 (eBook)
Green Building and Sustainable Materials 
Title Green building and 
Sustainable Materials 
Number 
Department Civil and Infrastructure 
Engineering 
L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type M.Tech Elective
Prerequisite 
Objectives: Objectives of this course are: 
1. To introduce elents of green building construction and use of sustainable materials.
2. To familiarize students with different national and international green performance
ratings.
3. To teach students methods of carbon footprint reduction and increase in energy
efficiency of a building.
Learning Outcomes: A graduate of this course will have a thorough idea of: 
1. National and international green building assessment system and requirements.
2. Green building design elements and use of sustainable materials.
3. Techniques to reduce the carbon footprint of a green building.
4. Management of hydrological cycle, treatment of waste, and maintainance of indoor
air quality.
5. Green building economics, business plan, and management.
Contents 
Introduction to green building: Rationale for high-performance green building; green building 
progress and obstacles; trends in high -performance green building; the green building 
movement. (Lectures: 3) 
Ecological design:  design vs ecological design; contemporary ecological design; future 
ecological design; thermo dynamics: limits on recycling and the dissipation of materials 
(Lectures: 3) 
Green building assessment: US green building assessment system; international green building 
assessment system; performance assessment. (Lectures: 3) 
LEED building rating system: history of LEED; structure of the LEED suite of building assessment 
systems; LEED credentials; the LEED process; LEED categories. (Lectures: 3) 
The Green Globes building assessment system : the Green Globes process; Green Globes 
verification and certification; structure of the ANSI/GBI 01-2010 standard; the Green Globes 
professional and Green Globes Assessor. (Lectures: 3) 
Green building design process:  conventional vs green building delivery systems; 
executing the green building project; the integ rated design progress; role of Charrette in 
the design process; green building documentation requirements. (Lectures: 3)  
Sustainable site and landscape:  land and landscape approaches for green buildings; 
sustainable landscapes; enhancing ecosystems; storm water management; low -impact 
development; heat island mitigation; light trespass and pollution reduction; sustainable site 
initiative. (Lectures: 3) 
Energy and carbon footprint reduction:  building energy issues; high -performance 
building energy design str ategy; passive design strategy; building envelope; internal load 
reduction; active mechanical system; water -heating system; electrical power systems; 
innovative energy optimization strategies; renewable energy systems; fuel cells; smart 
buildings and energy management systems; ozone-depleting chemicals in HVAC&R systems; 
reducing carbon footprint of the built environment. (Lectures: 4) 
Built environment hydrological cycle: global water resource depletion; hydrological cycle 
terminology; high -performance bui lding hydrological cycle strategy; designing the high -
performance building hydrological cycle; water budget rules of thumb; sustainable 
stormwater management; landscaping water efficiency. (Lectures: 4) 
Closing materials loops:  distinguishing between green building products and green 
building materials; LCA of building materials and products; environmental product 
declaration; materials and product certification systems; emerging construction materials 
and products; design for deconstruction. (Lectures: 4) 
Indoor environmental quality:  IEQ issues; design; main components of integrated IEQ 
design; emission from building materials; economic benefits of good indoor environmental 
quality. (Lectures: 3) 
Construction operations and commissioning: site protection planning; indoor air quality 
during construction; construction materials management; construction and demolition waste 
management. (Lectures: 3) 
Green building economics:  the business case for high -performance green building;  the 
economics of green building; quantifying green building benefits. (Lectures: 3) 
Text Books 
1. Charles J. Kibert (2013). Sustainable Construction. John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-1-
118-33013-5
2. J. Newman and Ban Sang Choo (2003)  Advanced Concrete Technology -Constituent
Materials (1st Ed), Elsevier. ISBN 9780080489988.
3. S. Kubba (2010) LEED Practices, Certification, and Accreditation Hand book (1st Ed)
Elsevier. ISBN 9780080958590.
Additional materials: 
1. Ministry of Power, Energy Conservation Building Code 2018, Revised Version, Bureau
of Energy Efficiency, 2018,
2. Indian Building Congress, Practical Handbook on Energy Conservation in Buildings, 1
st ed. Nabhi Publication, 2008.
3. TERI-Griha’s Green Design practices (www.teriin.org/bcsd/griha/griha.htm)
4. Sartori, I., and Hestnes, A. G. “Energy use in the life cycle of conventional and low -
energy buildings: A review article”, Energy and Buildings., 20, 249-257.2007
5. Green Building Basics, California Integrated Waste Management Board 
(www.ciwmb.ca.gov/GREENBUILDING/Basics.htm#What) 
6. Catarina Thormark. “A low energy building in a life cycle —its e mbodied energy,
energy need for operation and recycling potential”, Building and Environment., 37,
429-435.2001.
Online course Material 
“NOC:Energy Efficiency, Acoustics and daylighting in Building” by Prof. B. Bhattacharjee on 
NTPEL. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/102/105102175/ 
Traffic Flow Theory 
Title Traffic Flow Theory Number 
Department Civil and Infrastructure 
Engineering 
L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type M.Tech Elective
Prerequisite 
Objectives: The course will introduce students to: 
1. Fundamentals of traffic flow
2. Analysis of traffic flow
3. Traffic flow modelling approaches
Learning Outcomes: At the end of the course, the student should be able to: 
1. Differentiate and analyse traffic flow parameters at micro-macro levels
2. Analyse congestion propagation in traffic flow
3. Understand the state-of-the-art traffic flow modelling
4. Perform traffic flow modelling and analysis using field data
Contents 
Introduction to Traffic Flow theory : Macroscopic parameters – Space mean speed, 
Density, and Flow; Microscopic parameters – Time mean speed, Time headway, Space 
headway, occupancy; Relation between microscopic and macroscopic parameters; 
Fundamental traffic flow equation [Lectures 6]. 
Macroscopic models of Traffic flow : Empirical and theoretical models, Continuity 
equations, Solution to linear and non-linear partial differential equations, Two fluid model 
[Lectures 10]. 
Microscopic Models of Traffic flow: Car following models, Response Stimulus model, 
Psychophysical model, stability, Advanced car following models [Lectures 10]. 
Propagation of disturbance : Non -linear traffic waves and acceleration of stream, 
Shockwave theory and applications [Lectures 6]. 
Analysis of traffic flow : Accumulation diagrams, Incidents, Probabilistic analysis of 
traffic flow, Gap acceptance theory, Queuing theory and applications [Lectures 10]. 
Text Books 
1. Ni, D. Traffic flow Theory. BH, Elsevier, MA, USA.
2. Adolf D. May. Traffic flow fundamentals. Copyright: Prentice Hall, Inc
3. Nicholas J Garber and Lester A Hoel. Traffic and Highway Engineering. Copyright:
Brooks/Cole-Wadsworth Group\Thomson learning
4. Fred. L. Mannering, Walter P. Kilareski, and Scott S. Washburn. Principles of
Highway Engineering and Traffic Analysis. Copyright: John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
5. C. Jotin Khisty and B. Kent Lall. Transportation Engineering. Copyright; Pearson
Education, Inc.
Additional references: 
1. Kadiyali. L. R. (2016).Traffic Engineering and Transport Planning. Khanna
Publishers
2. Chakroborty, P., Animesh Das (2017). Principles of Transportation Engineering.
Second Edition, PHI Learning Private Limited
3. Saxena S. C. (2014). Textbook of Highway and Traffic engineering. CBS
4. Samuel Morgan (2016) Traffic Engineering and Transport Planning. Williford Pr.
5. Jaume Barceló. (2010) Fundamentals of Traffic Simulation. Springer.
6. Roess, R.P., Prassas E. S., McShane W. R. (2010) Traffic Engineering. Pearson
Traffic System and Management 
Title Traffic System and 
Management 
Number 
Department Civil and Infrastructure 
Engineering 
L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type M.Tech Elective
Prerequisite 
Objectives: The course will introduce students to: 
1. Traffic system characteristics
2. Traffic control system
3. Traffic studies and basic analysis
4. Intelligent Transportation System (ITS)
Learning Outcomes: At the end of the course, the student should be able to: 
1. Understand in-depth the data collection methods and analysis of various traffic flow
parameters
2. Design traffic control systems
3. Have adequate exposure to various traffic management measures
4. Understand the fundamentals and applications of ITS
Contents 
Traffic Systems Characteristics: User, Vehicle and Traffic characteristics [Lectures 6]. 
Traffic Studies and Basic Analysis : Speed, journey time, and delay studies, Volume 
and occupancy studies, Origin -destination Studies, Parking studies, Accident Studies. 
Capacity and Level of Service (LOS) analysis [Lectures 10]. 
Traffic Control System : Road markings – Principles of road markings, carriageway 
markings and object markings; Traffic signs – Importance of traffic signs, Types of traffic 
signs; Intersection control, Signal design- Illustration of signals, fixed time signals, signal 
design using IRC method and HCM method [Lectures 12]. 
Traffic Management : Strategies and techniques, Traffic calming, conge stion studies 
and road pricing [Lectures 8]. 
Intelligent Transportation system : User services and architecture, standards and 
evaluation, Public Transport and bus priority, Artificial intelligence in advanced traffic and 
ITS [Lectures 6]. 
Text Books 
1. Nicholas J Garber and Lester A Hoel. Traffic and Highway Engineering. Copyright:
Brooks/Cole-Wadsworth Group\Thomson learning
2. Fred. L. Mannering, Walter P. Kilareski, and Scott S. Washburn. Principles of
Highway Engineering and Traffic Analysis. Copyright: John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
3. C. Jotin Khisty and B. Kent Lall. Transportation Engineering. Copyright; Pearson
Education, Inc.
4. https://coeut.iitm.ac.in/ITS_synthesis.pdf
5. Sussman, J. Perspectives on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS). New York,
NY: Springer, 2005
Additional references: 
1. Kadiyali. L. R. (2016).Traffic Engineering and Transport Planning. Khanna
Publishers
2. Chakroborty, P., Animesh Das (2017). Principles of Transportation Engineering.
Second Edition, PHI Learning Private Limited
3. Roess, R.P., Prassas E. S., McShane W. R. (2010) Traffic Engineering. Pearson
Environmental Aspects of Power Plant 
Title Environmental Aspects of 
Power Plant 
Number 
Department Civil and Infrastructure 
Engineering 
L-T-P-D [C] 1-0-0 [1]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type M.Tech Elective
Prerequisite 
Objectives 
1. To provide basic knowledge of combustion and conversion technologies.
2. To make students familiar with emissions, pre - and post -combustion control
technologies and waste management techniques.
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to achieve proficiency in: 
1. Identifying the issues and appropriately choose the right pollution control technique
for gas and particle phase emissions.
2. Assessing the efficiency of conventional as well as emerging combustion technologies
targeting pollution reduction.
Contents 
Introduction: Types of emissions Types of pollutants (SOx, NOx, CO, trace elements and 
other Coal Combustion Products) and their impacts, Emission standards [Lectures 2]. 
Combustion Technologies: Gasification, Types of gasifiers, Gasification vs Combustion, 
Fluidized bed combustion (FBC), Concept of Integrated Gasification Combined Cycle (IGCC), 
IGCC vs pulverized coal combustion (PCC) [Lectures 5]. 
Pre- and Po st-combustion Control: Flue gas desulfurization (FGD), NOx and SOx 
treatments (low NOx burners, flue gas recirculation and SCR), Particulate matter control 
systems (Electrostatic precipitators, mechanical collectors and other devices (particulate 
scrubbers, baghouse filters, fabric filters etc.) [Lectures 5]. 
Ash handling: Ash (fly ash, bottom ash, pond ash, FBC ash, boiler slag, FGD ash); Scrubber 
slurry; Ash Handling and Sustainable practices, leaching aspects [Lectures 2]. 
Text Books 
1. Fuels and Fuel Technology, F. Peter, A.Wheatan & Co. Ltd., First edition, 1965.
2. Fuels and Combustion, S. Sarkar, Orient Longman, Second edition, 1990.
3. Hydrogen and Syngas Production and Purification Technologies, Ke Liu, C. Song and
V. Subramani, John Wiley & Sons, 2010.
4. The Chemistry and Technology of Coal, J. G. Speight, CRC Press, 2013.
Soil Stabilization and Ground Improvement 
Title Soil Stabilization and 
Ground Improvement 
Number 
Department Civil and Infrastructure 
Engineering 
L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type M.Tech Elective
Prerequisite 
Objectives: This course will introduce: 
1. Scopes of soil stabilization and ground improvement in various geotechnical
projects.
2. Different conventional and advanced method of ground improvement and their
applications.
3. Role of ground water and soil types on the stability of soil covers and grounds.
Learning Outcomes: A graduate of this course will have a thorough knowledge of: 
1. Behaviour of soils under different environmental conditions and their compaction
behavior.
2. Role and planning of drainage to enhance stability of grounds.
3. Different mechanical, chemical, and cmenting stabilization techniques regularly
used in stabilization programs.
4. Use of geosynthetics and influence of their properties on ground improvement.
5. Elements of grouting and injection to increase soil stabilization.
Contents 
Formation and development of ground: Formation of rock, soil, and soil profile; Soil 
distribution in India; alteration of ground after formation; reclaimed soil; ground 
improvement potential [Lectures 3]. 
Compaction: compaction mechanics; field procedure; surface compaction; selection of 
field compaction procedures; compaction quality control [Lectures 5]. 
Drainage methods: seepage; filter requirements; groundwater; methods of dewatering 
systems; design steps for dewatering systems; drains [Lectures 5]. 
Precompression and vertical drains:  compressibility of soils and consolidation; pre -
loading and surface fills; vertical drains; dynamic consolidation; consolidation by electro-
osmosis [Lectures 5]. 
Vibration methods: vibro-compression; vibro-displacement compression [Lectures 5]. 
Grouting and injection: aspects of grouting; gr outing procedure; applications 
[Lectures 5]. 
Mechanical, cementing, and chemical stabilization: requirements of soil 
stabilization; mechanical stabilization; Portland cement stabilization; bituminous 
stabilization; chemical stabilization; construction methods [Lectures 4]. 
Geosynthetics: geosynthetic types; properties of geosynthetics; applications of 
geosynthetics [Lectures 4]. 
Contemporary soil improvement techniques: soil reinforcement; thermal methods; 
other simple methods; improving rock stability and quality [Lectures 5]. 
Case histories of ground improvement: traditional ground improvements adopted in 
weak soils in India and abroad; codal suggestions [Lectures 2]. 
Text Books 
1. Dr. Purushottama Raj (2005). Ground Improvement Techniques. Laxmi
Publications. ISBN: 9788170088370.
2. Hausmann, M.R. (1990). Engineering Principles of Ground Modification, McGraw-Hill
International Editions. ISBN: 9780070272798.
3. Bowles J.E. (1997). Foundation Analysis and Design (5th Ed). Tata McGraw-Hill
International Edition. ISBN 0-07-912247-7.
Online course Material 
1. Ground Improvement Techniques by Dr. G.L. Sivakumar Babu on NTPEL.
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/108/105108075/
Foundation Engineering 
Title Foundation Engineering Number 
Department Civil and Infrastructure 
Engineering 
L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type M.Tech Elective
Prerequisite 
Objectives: this course aims at : 
1. Introducing basic principles and methods of foundation design and constructions.
2. Introducing different ambient conditions that influence the stability of a foundation
in short and long-term.
3. Introducing methods of stable foundations in earthquake prone areas.
Learning Outcomes: Students will have the ability to 
1. Analyze the properties of soil and rock to design appropriate foundations.
2. Analytical knowledge of short-term and long-term consolidation behavior of
foundations.
3. Device methods to protect new and historical foundations against decay and
collapse.
4. Design earthquake resistant foundation in different soils and rocks.
5. Apply international and national codes to study soil and design foundations.
6.
Contents 
Shallow and deep foundation: selection of foundation type; shallow foundations; deep 
foundation [Lectures 3]. 
Bearing capacity of foundations: Bearing capacity of shallow foundations; bearing 
capacity of deep foundations; lateral load capacity of deep foundations; geotechnical 
earthquake engineering [Lectures 3]. 
Settlement of foundations: Collapsible soil; settlement of cohecionless  soil; other 
common causes of settlement; foundation on rock; allowable settlement [Lectures 3]. 
Consolidation: laboratory consolidation test; immediate settlement; primary 
consolidation; rate of primary consolidation; secondary compression; consolidation of 
soil beneath shallow foundation; consolidation of soil beneath deep foundation; 
settlement of unsaturated cohesive soil [Lectures 3]. 
Foundation of expansive soil: expansion potential;  basic expansive soil principles; 
prediction of foundation movement; foundation design for expansive soil; flatwork; 
expansive rock [Lectures 3]. 
Retaining walls: simple retaining wall without wall friction; simple retaining wall with 
friction; design and  construction of retaining walls; restrained retaining walls; 
mechanically stabilized earth retaining walls; sheet pile walls; temporary retaining walls; 
moisture migration through basement walls [Lectures 4]. 
Foundation deterioration and cracking:  timber decay; sulfate attack on concrete; 
frost; historic structures; shrinkage cracking; moisture migration through slab-on-grade 
foundations [Lectures 4]. 
Geotechnical earthquake engineering : seismological concepts;  ground motion 
parameters; dynamic soil behavior; ground response analysis; liquefaction; slope 
stability [Lectures 4]. 
Seismic strengthening/retro fitting methods for foundations : earthquake 
structural damage; foundation settlement; retaining walls; found ation alternatives to 
mitigate earthquake effects [Lectures 4]. 
Grading and other soil improvement methods:  grading; compaction; soil 
improvement methods [Lectures 4]. 
Foundation excavation, underpinning, and field load tests:  foundation excavation 
and c onstruction; field load tests; foundation underpinning; observational method. 
[Lectures 4]. 
Subsurface investigation and instrumentations: traditional in -situ investigations; 
advanced geophysical tests; field instrumentations [Lectures 3]. 
International building code for foundations:  general regulations for footing and 
foundations; foundation adjacent slopes; retaining walls; geot echnical earthquake 
engineering [Lectures 3]. 
Text Books 
1. Bowles JE (1997) Foundation Analysis and Design (5th Ed). Tata-McGraw Hill
International Edition. ISBN 0-07-912247-7.
2. Robert W. day (2010). Foundation Engineering Handbook (2nd Ed). McGraw-Hill
Professional. ISBN 978-0-07-174010-4.
3. Budhu. M (2012). Soil Mechanics and Foundations (3 rd Ed). John Wiley and Sons.
ISBN: 978-0-470-55684-9.
4. Robert W. day (2010). Foundation Engineering Handbook (2 nd Ed). McGraw-Hill
Professional. ISBN 978-0-07-174010-4.Manjriker
Additional references 
Foundation Engineering (2018) by Prof. Kousik Deb on NPTEL. 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105105176/ 
Advanced Mechanics of Solids 
Title Advanced Mechanics of 
Solids 
Number 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type M.Tech Elective
Prerequisite 
Objectives 
1. Enable students to learn advanced concepts of stress analysis
2. Apply concepts to analysis of mechanical systems such as rotating disks, thick
cylinders etc.
Learning Outcomes 
1. Develop Ability to solve advanced stress analysis problems using analytical and
numerical methods
2. Ability to formulate and solve 3D problems in stress analysis
Contents 
Introduction to Cartesian tensors, Stress: Normal and shear stress, Equilibrium 
equations (force and moment), Symmetry of shear tensor, Equilibrium at boundary 
(Cauchy Equation). 2-D problems Plane stress, Stress transformation, Principal stresses, 
maximum shear stress, Mohr’s circle [Lectures 7]. 
Displacements and strains, Green’s strain, Compatibility condition, Plane strain Problems, 
Strain transformation, Strain gage and rosette [Lectures 5]. 
Structural Approximations: Physical and mathematical. Structural elements-bars, 
beams, plates, membrane, shear panel, shells [Lectures 1]. 
Mechanical behavior of Engineering Materials, Effect of Temperature, Anisotropic, 
Isotropic, Orthotropic materials, Failure Criteria (Distortion strain energy, Octahedral 
shear stress) Maximum normal stress, Maximum Shear stress (Tresca), Maximum 
distortion energy (von-Mises and Hencky) [Lectures 4]. 
Theory of Elasticity, Plane Stress Problem with Stress formulation in 2-D, Plane Strain 
Problem with Stress Formulation in 2-D, Airy’s stress function, stress, strain and 
equilibrium in polar coordinates, Displacement formulation with plane stress, St. Venant’s 
Principle [Lectures 4]. 
Bending and extension of beams, stress-resultants, Equilibrium equations in terms of 
deformation with transverse and axial load [Lectures 3]. 
Torsion of slender bodies (beams), Prandtl stress function formulation, Membrane 
analogy, Closed form beam torsion analytical solution, Warping function formulation, Thin 
Walled open sections, Torsion constants for rolled and extruded beams, Thin wall ed 
closed sections, Shear flow [Lectures 8]. 
Beam shearing stresses due to shear forces, Shear Centre [Lectures 3]. 
Euler Buckling [Lectures 3]. 
Principle of virtual-work [Lectures 4]. 
Text Books 
1. Srinath, L.S. (2009), Advanced Solid Mechanics, Tata McGraw-Hill
2. Timoshenko, S.P., and Goodier, J.N. (1980), Theory of Elasticity, Tata McGraw- Hill
3. Sadd, M. H. (2006), Elasticity: Theory, Applications and Numerics, Academic Press
Online course Material 
1. http://nptel.ac.in/courses/105106049/
Theory of Vibration 
Title Theory of Vibrations Number MEL7XX0 
Department Civil Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type M.Tech
Elective
Prerequisite Basic knowledge of mechanical 
vibrations 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide the approach adopted for analyzing the structural dynamic characteristics and
dynamic response of uniform and non-uniform structural elements, like beams.
2. The approach is applicable for structural dynamic analysis of any structure.
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Analyze the vibration characteristics of non-uniform beams.
2.  Thorough understanding of approximate me thods used in the structural dynamic
analysis. 
Contents 
Introduction: Discrete and continuous systems, SDOF, Types of Damping, Frequency 
response, Time response, Beating phenomenon, Response to impulse loading, Convolution 
integral, Numerical integration, Newmark-β method, Wilson-θ method [Lectures 9]. 
Rayleigh’s Method:  Approximate evaluation of natural frequency, improved Rayleigh’s 
method [Lectures 4]. 
Stiffness and flexibility influence coefficients, finite element stiffness of beam elements, Static 
condensation [Lectures 5]. 
Hamilton’s principle, Lagrange’s equations [Lectures 3]. 
Linear conservative natural systems:  Symmetric eigenvalue problem, Modal analysis, 
Systems with proportional damping, structural damping (complex stiffness) [Lectures 4]. 
Continuous parameter systems:  Longitudinal vibration of bars, bending vibration of 
beams, torsion vibration [Lectures 4]. 
Differential Eigenvalue Problem:  Admissible function, Comparison function, Eigen 
function [Lectures 2]. 
Positive definite system, self adjoint property [Lectures 2]. 
Natural modes of vibration: Mode shapes and natural frequencies [Lectures 2]. 
Approximate methods: Transfer Matrix method, Rayleigh’s quotient, Rayleigh-Ritz method, 
Galerkin method [Lectures 5]. 
Response to excitation: Mode summation, Mode acceleration [Lectures 2]. 
Reference Books 
1. Meirovitch, L., Principles and Techniques of Vibrations, 3rd Edition, Prentice Hall
2. Meirovitch, L., Analytical Methods in Vibration Analysis, Macmillan
3. Clough, R.W., and Penzien, J., Dynamics of Structures, McGraw Hill
Online course Material 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105101006/ 
Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion
Title Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion (OTEC) Number CH7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 1-0-0 [1]
Offered for B. Tech./ M.Tech./M.Tech.-Ph.D./ Ph.D. Type M.Tech Elective
Prerequisite Thermodynamics 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide understanding of Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion (OTEC) cycles, hybrid OTEC
systems and technological challenges.
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the: 
1. 1. Proper knowledge about Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion (OTEC) cycles and hybrid OTEC
technologies.
2. 2. Ability to understand OTEC design challenges.
vi Contents 
Ocean as a Heat Engine:  Concepts of ocean thermal energy, Favourable temper ature 
difference, OTEC history [Lectures 2]. 
OTEC Cycles: Closed OTEC cycles, Open OTEC cycle, Flow diagrams, Comparison of OTEC 
Cycles, Products of OTEC: electricity, desalinated water, cold water for air -conditioning etc., 
Hybrid OTEC systems [Lectures 6]. 
OTEC System Design:  System components, Heat exchangers, evaporators, Pumps, 
Turbines, Piping, Platform concepts, Dual Purpose OTEC Pl ants, Challenges, Case studies 
[Lectures 6]. 
Textbook 
1. Takahashi, Patrick and Trenka, Andrew, (1996) Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion, Ist ed.,
Wiley.
Reference Books 
1. Lockerby,R.W., (1981) Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion (OTEC), US Department of
Energy, United States.
Process safety and Hazards 
Title Process safety and Hazards Number CH7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type M.Tech
Elective
Prerequisite None 
Objective 
The Instructor will: 
 Provide comprehensive knowledge of safety regulations and their practices,
chemical plant hazards and their control, risk assessment and management
principles and techniques and accident analysis.
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
 Identify and distinguish typical sources of risk and hazard in a process plant,
undertake hazard and operability (HAZOP) study.
Contents 
Safety in Industries: Concepts and definition, storage of dangerous materials, Plant 
layout Safety systems, Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) incidence 
rate, Fatal accident rate (FAR), Measures to take during accidents, Toxicology [Lectures 
10]. 
Industrial Hygiene: Government regulations, Industrial hygiene and safety aspects 
related to toxicity, noise, pressure, temperature, vibrations, radiation etc, Evaluation 
Methods, Evaluating workers Exposures to dusts, noise [Lectures 8]. 
Selection Mechanism : Tech nology and process selection, Scale of disaster, Fire 
triangle Ignition, Confined and unconfined explosion, Vapors cloud explosions, Boiling 
liquid expanding vapor explosion (BLEVE), Dust explosion, shock wave, Flammability 
characteristics of liquids and vapors, Minimum oxygen concentration (MOC) and Inerting 
[Lectures 8]. 
Handling Chemicals and toxicity:  Control of toxic chemicals, Storage and handling 
of flammable and toxic chemical, Runway reactions, Relief system risk and hazards 
management, Design to  prevent Fires and Explosions, Miscellaneous Design for  
preventing Fires and Explosion [Lectures 8]. 
Hazards Identification: checklists, Surveys, Hazard and Operability Studies (HAZOP), 
Safety reviews. Risk Assessment, Hazard models and risk data. Tackling disasters, plan 
for emergency. Risk management routines, Emergency shutdown systems, Role of 
computers in safety, Prevention of hazard human element, Te chnology and process 
selection [Lectures 8]. 
Text Books 
1. Daniel A. Crowl and Joseph F. Louvar, 1990, Chemical Process Safety:
Fundamentals with applications, Prentice Hall, Inc.
2. Lee, F.P., 1983, Loss prevention in the process Industries, Volume 1 and 2
Butterworth.
3. Hoboken, N. J., 2000, Guidelines for Chemical Process Quantitative Risk Analysis,
Wiley-Interscience.
Reference Books 
1. R. W. King and J. Magid, Industrial Hazards and Safety Handbook, Butterworth,
1982.
2. G. L. Wells, Safety in Process Plant Design, John Wiley and Sons Inc., 1980.
3. Fawcett, H.H. and W.S. Wood, Safety and Accident Prevention in Chemical
Operations, 2nd Edition, Wiley-Interscience, New York, 1982.
Advanced Energy Systems 
Title Advanced Energy Systems Number CH7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type M.Tech
Elective
Prerequisite None 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
 Provide comprehensive knowledge about conventional and several advanced energy
production technology.
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have: 
 Good knowledge about different energy production systems.
Contents 
Introduction: Latest topics on energy, Energy fuels for power generation, conventional 
power generation technology [lectures 6]. 
Emerging clean energy systems: Integrated Gasification co mbined cycle (IGCC), 
Pressurized fluidised bed combustion (PFBC, AFBC) [lectures 6]. 
Heavy fuel based power generation [lectures 3]. 
Advanced combustion systems [lectures 4]. 
Understanding Natural gas cycles [lectures 4]. 
Energy conservation in power plants [lectures 4]. 
Geological CO2 sequestering [lectures 3]. 
Natural gas cycles [lectures 4]. 
Materials-based Solutions to advanced Energy systems: role of advanced material, 
general devices and process approaches, key materials for advanced energy  systems, 
structural material [lectures 8]. 
Textbook 
1. Khartekenko, N., Khartekenko, V.,  2010, Advanced Energy Systems , Taylor &
Francies, Second Edition.
Reference Books 
1. Colin Tong, 2019, Introduction to Materials for Advanced Energy Systems, Springer.
2. I. Dincer and C. Zamfirescu, 2011, Sustainable Energy Systems and Applications ,
Springer.
Plugin Electric Vehicles 
Title Plugin Electric Vehicles Number EE7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–2 [4] 
Offered for B.Tech./M.Tech./Ph.D. Type M.Tech Elective
Prerequisite 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1.  1. Provide understanding of various technologies of plugin electric vehicle and hybrid electric
vehicle and their role in smart grid operation
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  1. Design powertrain circuit topology and appropriate control scheme for electric vehicle
2. 2. Understand and design EV charging infrastructure
Contents 
Introduction to EV: Recent development trends, types of electric vehicles [Lectures 2]. 
Powertrain: Concepts of powertrain sizing in EV and PHEV, starting, braking [Lectures 6]. 
Storage systems : Battery types, parameters, battery modeling, battery management 
[Lectures 5]. 
Charging Infrastructure : Domestic ch arging infrastructure, public charging infrastructure, 
normal charging station, occasional charging station, fast charging station, battery swapping 
station, types of charging: constant voltage, constant current, pulse charging, inductive, 
conductive charging [Lectures 8]. 
Vehicle-to-X systems: Vehicle -to-grid, vehicle -to-home, vehicle -to-building, vehicle -to-
vehicle [Lectures 8]. 
Hybrid Electric Vehicle : Configuration of HEV (series, parallel, series -parallel & complex), 
power flow control in HEV configurations, control [Lectures 6]. 
Vehicle Communication : Introduction to in -vehicle communicatio ns and controller area 
network [Lectures 4]. 
PEV integration: Impact on transmission and distribution network [Lectures 3]. 
Laboratory: Experiments related to the following topics will be conducted under laboratory 
component: SoC estimation, control of electric vehicle drives, regenerative braking, 
powertrain and vehicle dynamics, EV chargers and their control, vehicle -to-grid technology, 
vehicle-to-vehicle technology, EV charging from solar PV, performance of aggregator, Use of 
simulation tools (MATLAB, SIEMENS EV related softwares) to simulate different subsystems 
of EV and different scenarios. 
Textbook 
1. 1. Husain,I., (2011), Electric and Hybrid Vehicles Design Fundamentals, 2nd Edition, CRC Press
2. 2. Ehsani,M., Gao,Y., Emadi,A., (2011), Modern Electric, Hybrid Electric, and Fuel Cell Vehicles
3. Fundamentals, Theory and Design, 2nd Edition, CRC Press
3. 4. Larminie,J., Lowry,J., (2003), Electric Vehicle Technology Explained, Wiley
Self Learning Material 
1. 1. Jain,A.K.,  Electric Vehicles - Part 1,  NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical
Engineering, IIT Delhi,  https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/102/108102121/
2. 2. Kumar,P., Majhi,S., Introduction to Hybrid and Electric Vehicles,  NPTEL Course Material,
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, IIT Guwahati,
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/103/108103009/
Smart Grid 
Title Smart Grid Number EE7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P
[C]
3–0–2 [4] 
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type M.Tech
Elective
Prerequisite 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide concepts and topics that are  relevant to smart grid technologies to facilitate 
exploring research opportunities 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Understand the basic concepts of smart grid development and the critical technologies 
that underpin such development, their basic principles, physical constraints, and 
technological potentials 
Contents 
Smart Grid Basics: Evolution of Electric Power Grid and Smart Grid, Objectives, main features 
and challenges of smart grid [Lectures 5]. 
Energy Resourc es: Centralized vs. distributed generation [Lecture 1] ; renewable energy: 
solar, wind, hydropower, biomass, geothermal, ocean wave; benefit, costs, an d policies of 
renewable energy [Lectures 5]; renewable sources integration – overcoming intermittence; 
storage systems technology [Lectures 4]. 
Plug-in Electric Vehicle (PEV): History of EV; PEV challenges and potential solutions [Lectures 
1]; EV and electric power grid; PEV charging infrastruc ture, challenges and solutions 
[Lectures 4]; PEV as an energy storage device and an energy source (V2G) [Lectures 2]. 
Demand-side management: Load profile of the power grid; market pricing [Lectures 3]; peak 
shaving and valley filling; load forecasting [Lectures 4]; regulations and policies [Lectures 3]. 
Monitoring and Protection: Wide-area monitoring system (WAMS), SCADA and PMU [Lectures 
4]; advanced metering infrastructure (AMI); smart metering  [Lectures 3]; communication 
infrastructure and technologies [Lectures 3]. 
Laboratory: Experiments related to the following topics will be conducted under laboratory 
component: Characteristics of solar PV, grid integration of renewable energy sources, effect 
of loads on power quality with renewable energy penetration, Inverter -based microgri d, 
virtual inertia in inverter -based sources, demand side management, contribution of energy 
storage systems to enhance power quality, ancillary services, smart metering, performance 
of PMU 
Textbook 
1. Bollean,M.H.J., Hasan,F., (2011), Integration of Distributed Generation in the Power
Systems, Willey-IEEE India Press
2. Ehsani,M., Gao,Y., Gay,S.E., Emadi,A., (2005), Modern Electric, Hybrid Electric, and
Fuel Cell Vehicles: Fundamentals, Theory, and Design, CRC Press
3. Bansal,R., (2019), Power System Protection in Smart Grid Environment, CRC Press
Self-Learning Material 
The Smart Grid: An Introduction, 
http://www.oe.energy.gov/SmartGridIntroduction.htm, Department of Energy, 2008. 
Transmission Infrastructure 
Title Transmission Infrastructure Number EE7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech./Ph.D. Type M.Tech Elective
Prerequisite Introduction to Smart Grid 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1.  1. Provide knowledge related to infrastructure in various modes of power transmission such
as underground, marine, and overhead.
2. 2. Provide knowledge related to design, installation, and maintenance of the transmission
infrastructure.
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  1. Select appropriate transmission infrastructure needed for transmission of electric power
based on various factors.
2. 2. Design, install, and maintain power transmission infrastructure.
Contents 
Overhead transmission lines : Overhead line routing, aerial survey, ground survey, 
overhead line foundations, soil investigation, foundation types, foundation design, support 
structures, steel lattice towers, tower testing, overhead line fittings, suspension clamps, sag 
adjusters, bi-metal connectors, conductor loads, lightning, surge diverters, insulator arcing 
horn co-ordination, aerodynamic phenomena, transmission voltage level clearances, wooden 
poles, distribution voltage clearances, overhead line maintenance , environmental 
considerations [Lecture 18]. 
Underground cables: Types of cable, insulation and conductor materials, air cable ampacity, 
underground cable ampacity, short circuit and its effect, thermal & electromechanical 
stresses, cable termination and joints, pulling the cable, installing cable racks, conduits, cable 
supports, cable tray and trenches, cable testing, steps for fault location, fault location 
methods [Lecture 12]. 
Marine cables: Introduction, marine survey, cable routing, cable system design parameters, 
cable design parameters, cable accessories, cable installation, cable materials & accessories, 
cable joints and terminations, inspections and testing, maintenance and failure investigation 
[Lecture 12]. 
Textbook 
1. 1. Kiessling,F., Nefzger,P., Nolasco,J.F., Kaintzyk,U., (2003), Overhead Power Lines Planning
Design Construction, 4th Edition, Springer
2. 2. Ganguli,S.K., Kohli,V., (2016), Power Cable Technology, CRC Press
3. 3. Worzyk,T., (2009), Submarine Power Cables Design, Installation, Repair, Environmental
Aspects, Springer
4. 4. Bayliss,C., Hardy,B., (2012), Transmission and Distribution Electrical Engineering , 4 th
Edition, Newnes publications.
Substation Infrastructure
Title Substation Infrastructure Number EE7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type M.Tech
Elective
Prerequisite 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide exposure to layout of various components of substation and design its 
infrastructure. 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Develop the layout of a substation and design the substation infrastructure 
Contents 
Substation Layout:  Substation design considerations, layouts - various bus 
configurations and space requirements [Lectures 5]. 
Auxiliary Power: Battery and charger configurations, battery capacity, battery sizing 
calculations, AC power supplies, auxiliary transformation connections, earthing 
transformer [Lectures 5]. 
Current and Voltage Transformers:  Types, design and constr uction constructions,  
[Lectures 4]. 
Insulators: Insulator materials, types, design consideration, testing [Lectures 4]. 
Earthing and Bonding: Touch and step voltage, earthing materials, earth resistance, 
earth potential rise, protective multiple earthing [Lectures 5]. 
Switchgear: Introduction, switches, disconnectors, contactors, introduction to 
operating mechanism and arc quenching [Lectures 5]. 
Textbook 
1. Bayliss,C., Hardy,B., (2012), Transmission and Distribution Electrical
Engineering, 4th Edition, Newnes publications
2. Rao,S., (1992), Electrical Substation Engineering and Practice Engineering &
Practice EHV-AC, HVDC AND SF6-GIS, 3rd Edition, Khanna publications
Gas Insulated Substation 
Title Gas Insulated Substation Number EE7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type M.Tech
Elective
Prerequisite 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
 Provide exposure to of gas insulated substations (GIS), its design, testing, and
diagnostics methods
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
 Design and test a gas insulated substation
Contents 
Introduction: Features, economics, arrangement, and components of gas insulated 
substations, comparison with air insulated substations [Lectures 4]. 
Introduction to SF 6: physical, chemical, and electrical properties, handling, 
specifications for GIS applications [Lectures 3]. 
Design of GIS: Ratings of components, estimation of electric stress, design aspects 
of GIS components, insulation design, insulation coordination, grounding systems 
[Lectures 6]. 
Testing: GIS testing, on -site tests, condition monitoring and diagnostic methods 
[Lectures 4]. 
Problems and Diagnostics: Particles and their effects, SF 6 gas decomposition, 
characteristics of imperfections in insulation, insulation diagnostics methods, partial 
discharge in GIS and its detection [Lectures 8]. 
Fast transient phenomena: Origin, characteristics, and effects of very fast transient 
overvoltages [Lectures 3]. 
Textbook 
1. Naidu,M.S., (2008), Gas Insulated Substations , I.K. International Publishing
House Pvt Ltd
2. Koch,H., (2014), GIS Gas Insulated Substations, IEEE Press and John Wiley &
Sons Ltd
Power System Protection 
Title Power System Protection Number EE7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type M.Tech
Elective
Prerequisite 
Objectives 
The Instructor will provide knowledge of: 
1. Various protection schemes and their applications in power industry
2. Relay coordination, instrument transformers
3. Numerical protection schemes based on signal processing techniques
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Design/propose protection schemes for various power system components
based on digital signal processing
2. Design relay coordination systems in distribution and transmission
Contents 
Overview of Power System Protection: Architecture of protection system, evolution 
of relays, zones of protections, concept of primary and back-up protection [Lectures 
2]. 
Overcurrent Protection: Principles of fuse and overcurrent protection and 
application to feeder and motor protection, relay coordination in distribution system 
[Lectures 6]. 
Distance Protection: Principles of distance relaying  [Lectures 2] and application to 
transmission system protection, relay coordination [Lectures 5]. 
Differential Protection: Principles of differential protection [Lectures 2]  and 
application to transformer, bus bar and generator armature winding protection 
[Lectures 5]. 
Introduction to Digital Relaying: Sampling, concept of moving window, signal 
conditioning, signal processing [Lectures 4]. 
Instrument Transformer: Current and voltage transformers in power system 
protection [Lectures 6]. 
Circuit breakers: Arc initiation and quenching, oil circuit breakers, air blast circuit 
breakers vacuum circuit breakers, SF6 circuit breakers[Lectures 5]. 
Current chopping, reverse recovery voltage [Lectures 3]. 
Lightning arresters: Principle of operation and types [Lectures 2]. 
Textbook 
1. Singh, L.P., (2017), Digital Protection: Protective Relaying from
Electromechanical to Microprocessor , 2 nd Edition, New Age International
Publications
2. Ram,B., Vishwakarma,D.N., (2017), Power System Protection and Switchgear ,
2nd Edition, Tata McGraw Hill Publications.
3. Phadke,A.G., Thorp,J.S., (2009), Computer relaying for Power System , 2 nd
Edition, John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Publications
Self Learning Material 
Soman,S.A.,  Power System Protection, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, 
     https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/101/108101039/  
Cyber-Physical Security in Smart Grid 
Title Cyber-Physical Security in Smart Grid Number EE7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P
[C]
3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type M.Tech
Elective
Prerequisite 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide exposure to the various layers of smart grid architecture and security issues 
related to vital components of smart grid 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Understand various cyber layers of smart grid and the threats to the physical 
components, and design a secure system 
Contents 
Introduction: Physical components of a grid, communication in smart grid, self -
monitoring, self-healing, vulnerabilities of smart grid, cyber-physical security (5 lectures) 
Security Architecture of Smart Grids: Security architecture of smart Grid and its layers, 
typical SCADA network levels, conceptual control system with layering, robust and 
resilient control, secure network rout ing, management of infor mation security, user 
patching [Lectures 6]. 
Advanced Metering Infrastructure and Security Issues: Smart meters, customer gateway, 
AMI communication network, AMI head-end, AMI security threats, interactions, malicious 
code planted in the system, denial of service, insider attacks,  unauthorized access 
[Lectures 4]. 
SCADA System Security: Introduction to SCADA, Security Issues in SCADA, Public 
Information Availability, Platform Vulnerabilities, Network Configuration Vulnerabilities, 
Network Perimeter Vulnerabilities, DNP3 Threats [Lectures 5]. 
Plug-in Electric Vehicle (PEV) Security Issues: Introduction to PEV Security, Privacy of 
movement, Secure payment, Critical Infrastructure and Physical Security, 
Communication issues in PEVs [Lectures 4]. 
Smart Grid Domain Security: IEEE standards for smart grid security, IEEE 802.11, IEEE 
802.15.4, IEEE 802.16, Bluetooth and BLE/BT5.0, ZigBee, Z-Wave, Gateway Component, 
FMEA, STAMP, HAZOP, Smart Grid Information Security (SGIS), SGIS Risk Impac t Level 
(SGIS-RIL) [Lectures 6]. 
Blockchain for Smart Grid: Blockchain: Smart contract, applications of blockchain 
technology to energy; Energy trading:  Transition towards blockchain -based electricity 
trading market, Internet of Energy (IoE);   Distribut ed Energy Resources: Decentralized 
operation of interdependent power and energy networks based on Blockchain and 
security,  Electric vehicles: Blockchain for decentralized optimization of energy sources: 
EV charging coordination via blockchain-based charging power quota trading,  Microgrid: 
microgrid monitoring and control using blockchain [Lectures 12]. 
Textbook 
 Hossain,E., Han,Z., Poor,H.V., (2012), Smart Grid Communications and Networking,
Cambridge University Press
 Berger,L.T., Iniewski,K., (2012), SMART GRID Applications, Communications, and
Security, John Wiley and Sons Publications
 Shafie-khan,M., (2020), Blockchain-based Smart Grids, Academic Press
Energy Harvesting 
Title Energy Harvesting Number PHL6XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech./M.Tech/Ph.D. Type M.Tech
Elective
Prerequisite 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide the student with an extended knowledge of the basic principles and recent
advances in Energy harvesting technologies for low -power applications including self -
powered or autonomous systems.
2. Provide the students with t he role of materials in energy harvesting  technologies with a
focus on miniaturized and microfabricated devices.
Learning Outcomes 
The students will: 
1. Develop an understanding of basic principle, concept, working mechanism and applications
of various energy harvesting devices.
2. Develop an understanding to design new energy harvesting systems.
Contents 
Micro Photovoltaic Module Energy Harvesting: p-n Junction and Crystalline Si Solar 
Cells, Amorphous Silicon Solar Cell, CIGS and CdTe Solar Cell Development, Polymer Solar 
Cell, Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells (DSSC), Perovskite Solar Cells, Monolithically Inte gration of 
Solar Cells with IC, Low -Power Micro Photovoltaic Systems, Maximum Power Point Tracking 
[Lecture 12]. 
Mechanical Energy Harvesting:  Energy Harvesting  from Macro to Micro to Nano, 
Piezoelectric MEMS Energy Harvesters, Nano-Piezoelectric Generator, Piezoelectric Cantilever 
Generator, Piezoelectric Transducers. New-generation Triboelectric Nanogenerators [Lecture 
8]. 
Thermal Energy Harvesting:  Overview of Nanoscale Heat Conduction and the Seebeck 
Effect, Thermoelectric energy harvesting and Power Generation, Thermoelectric figures of 
merit, Novel nanostructured Thermoelectric materials and devices, Thermal energy 
harvesting using pyroelectric materials, Thermodynamic cycles for Pyroelectric energy 
harvesting, Nanostructured and micro-scale materials and devices [Lecture 12]. 
Energy Storage: Li-ion Batteries, Li-polymer Batteries, Micro-batteries, Thin film batteries 
for Energy Storage, Materials for high-energy density 2D and 3D batteries. Supercapacitors: 
Electrolyte and Electrode materials, Fundamentals, Challenges and Applications [Lecture 10]. 
Textbooks 
1. Briand, D., Yeatman, E., Roundy, S., Micro Energy Harvesting Wiley, 2015.
2. Shashank, P., Inman, D. J., Energy Harvesting Technologies, Springer, 2009.
Self-Learning Material 
1. Elvin, N., Erturk, A., Advances in Energy Harvesting Methods, Springer, 2013.
2. Jaffe, R., and Taylor, W., Physics of Energy, MIT open course,
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/physics/8-21-the-physics-of-energy-fall-2009/
3. 
Preparatory Course Material 
4. Pal, K., Selection of Nanomaterials for Energy harvesting and Energy Storage
Applications, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112107283/
Energy Economics and Policy 
Title Energy Economics and 
Policy 
Number 
Department L-T-P-D [C] 1-0-0 [1]
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type M.Tech Elective
Prerequisite 
Objectives 
1. Enable students to learn advanced concepts of stress analysis
2. Apply concepts to analysis of mechanical systems such as rotating disks, thick
cylinders etc.
Learning Outcomes 
1. Develop Ability to solve advanced stress analysis problems using analytical and
numerical methods
2. Ability to formulate and solve 3D problems in stress analysis
Contents 
Energy as economic resources: classification of energy resources; measurement of 
energy; energy accounting [Lectures 7]. 
Energy demand: basic concepts in economics; descriptive analysis of energy demand; 
decomposition analysis and parametric approach; demand side management; load 
management [Lectures 7]. 
Text Books 
1. Alessandro Rubino Alessandro Sapio Massimo La Scala Michelle Hallack (2020)
Handbook of Energy Economics and Policy (1st Ed). Elsevier Academic Press. ISBN:
9780128147122.
Online course Material 
1. “Energy Economics and policy” by Prof. Shyamasree Dasgupta on NTPEL.
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/109/106/109106161/
Wind turbine and field design 
Title Wind turbine and field design Number CIVIL7XX0 
Department Civil Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type M.Tech Elective
Prerequisite 
Objectives 
1. To provide high-level insight into the technical and engineering aspects of wind energy.
2. To develop understanding of advanced principles of aerodynamics and structural
mechanics used in design of wind turbine.
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have understanding of: 
1. Wind turbine dynamic system behavior with integrat ed components and their control for
a given application.
2. Computing performance characteristics of the main components of wind turbine.
3. Wind turbine blade aerodynamics to predict force components and moments experienced
by modern wind turbines.
Contents 
Wind power: Introduction to wind power: Maximum rated power, power coefficient, average 
annual power from a wind turbine, wind speed relationships based on the Beaufort scale, wind 
turbine protection from the wind, total energy from the wind, energy content, geographical 
resource distribution, influence of terrain, measurement m ethods and statistical analysis 
[Lectures 10]. 
Aerodynamics: Fluid flow concept, 2-D Aerodynamics, 3-D aerodynamics [Lectures 12]. 
Turbines: Introduction and Evolution of wind turbines, classification and status and basic 
anatomy of wind turbines, design of turbine rotor blades, HAWTs, VAWTs, Betz and Glaurets 
turbine theories and the BEM method, Horizontal and vertical axis wind turbines (HA WTs and 
VAWTs), blades, choice of materials and adaptation to different climates, aeroelasti city and 
Wind turbine modelling [Lectures 10]. 
Controls: Control mechanisms, control targets, control strategies (pitch and stall regulation) 
[Lectures 10]. 
Textbook 
1. J. F. Maxwell, J. G. McGowan, and A. L. Rogers, Wind Energy Explained – Theory,
Design, and Applications, John Wiley & Sons, 2010, ISBN: 978-0-47001500-1.
2. Martin O. L. Hansen, Aerodynamics of Wind Turbines, Second edition, Earthscan, UK,
2008.
Offshore Wind Energy Harvesting 
Title Offshore Wind Energy Harvesting Number CIVIL7XX0 
Department Civil Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type M.Tech
Elective
Prerequisite 
Objectives 
1. To highlight the complexities of an offshore wind farms and differences with their
onshore counterpart.
2. To introduce the principles of an offshore wind farm design.
3. To introduce principles of management and economics of a wind farm
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have understanding of: 
1. Aerodynamic, hydrodynamic, and structural loads on offshore wind structures.
2. Design of fixed and floating platforms for wind turbines.
3. Principles of designs of a wind firm, its control, and maintenance.
4. Details of the life-cycle cost and economic feasibility study of an offshore wind farm.
Contents 
The offshore environment : Atmospheric wind flow and its characteristic in the boundary 
layer, ocean winds, wave theories, wind and wave forces on offshore structures [Lectures 7]. 
Fixed and floating offshore platforms, their analysis, and design:   Fixed and floating 
offshore platforms, mooring lines-their dynamic analysis, wind forces on offshore structures, 
Design provisions in API and DNV codes, Fixed and floating o ffshore wind turbines -their 
dynamic analysis, coupled and uncoupled analysis, Fatigue consideration [Lectures 8]. 
Floating offshore wind turbines (FOWT):  OWT drivetrain and gearbox simulation; 
Dynamic behaviour of bearings on offshore wind turbine gearbox : Experimental 
characterization of OWT gearbox in operation [Lectures 7]. 
Offshore wind turbine field design: Spatiotemporal wind resource assessment; 
Bathymetry and other sea constraints; Strategic planning; Offshore wind farm design; Large 
eddy simulation of wind farm aerodynamics [Lectures 7]. 
Operation and Maintenance Modelling:  Classification of models; State -of-the-art in 
modelling; Decision support tools: vessel -fleet optimization models, cost -benefit evaluation 
of remote inspection [Lectures 7]. 
Life-cycle cost and economic feasibility of a floating offshore wind farm:  Life-cycle 
cost calculation: Economic Map Tools and Restrictions Maps Tools; Life -cycle definition, 
breakdown structure of processes, and calculation of costs; CAPEX and OPEX; Net P resent 
Value (NPV); Internal Rate of Return (IRR); Discounted Pay -Back Period (DPBP); Levelized 
Cost of Energy (LCOE); Cost of Power Ratio [Lectures 7]. 
Suggested Textbooks: 
1. Olimpo Anaya -Lara, John O. Tande, Kjetil Uhlen, Karl Merz (2018) Offshore Wind
Energy Technology. Wiley. ISBN 9781119097785.
2. Joao Cruz, Mairead Atcheson (2016). Floating offshore wind energy (1st Ed). Springer.
ISBN 978-3-319-29398-1.
3. Wiesław Ostachowicz, Malcolm McGugan, Jens-Uwe Schroder-Hinrichs, Marcin Luczak.
MARE-WINT. New Materials and Reliability in Offshore Wind Turbine Technology .
Springer Nature. ISBN 978-3-319-39034-9.
4. Laura Castro -Santos, Vincente Diaz -Casas (2016) Floating Offshore Wind Farms .
Springer. ISBN 978-3-319-27972-5.
5. S. K. Chakrabarti (2021). Dynamics of floating offshore structures . World Scientific.
ISBN: 9789814280563
Offshore Tidal Energy Harvesting 
Title Offshore Tidal Energy Harvesting Number CIVIL7XX0 
Department Civil Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type M.Tech
Elective
Prerequisite 
Objectives 
1. Holistic introduction of different aspects of a tidal energy system.
2. Introduction of design principles and size optimization.
3. Basics of control and reliability assessment of a tidal system.
Learning Outcomes 
1. Knowledge of prefeasibility assessment models.
2. Knowledge of optimization techniques to increase efficiency of a tidal energy system.
3. Different control system of a tidal current turbine.
4. Knowledge of different failure models for reliability assessment.
Content 
Introduction of tidal energy: Principles and components of tidal power plants; Available 
technologies and concepts; Estimation of energy calculation; Tidal dynamics an d structures 
of tidal currents [Lectures 7]. 
Prefeasibility analysis: Analysis of location; Physical boundaries of assessment; Static v/s 
transect field survey; Location assessment: Farm method and Flux method [Lectures 7]. 
Optimum sizing and modelling of tidal energy system:  Modelling of tidal energy 
conversion systems; Numerical solution of tidal energy systems; Modelling of a tidal current 
turbine; Tidal energy facility size [Lectures 7]. 
Control system: Automatic control system; Control strategies of ocean wave conversion 
systems; Reactive power control of tidal turbin e; Dynamic control of tidal current turbine; 
Power system stability analysis [Lectures 7]. 
Reliability assessment: The failure distribution model; Constant failure rate model; Time 
dependent failure model; Assessment of tidal energy system by fault tree analysis [Lectures 
7]. 
Advances in tidal energy systems:  Tidal energy system scenario: India and World; 
Environmental assessment; Tidal harmonic analysis; Assessment of tidal energy system: 
Optimization technique and Game theory; Economic analysis [Lectures 7]. 
Textbook 
1. Vikas Khare, Cheshta Khare , Savita Nema,   Prashant Baredar (2019). Tidal energy
systems. Elsevier. ISBN: 978-0-12-814881-5.
2. S. K. Chakrabarti (2021). Dynamics of floating offshore structures. World Scientific.
ISBN: 9789814280563
Power Plant Engineering 
Title Power Plant Engineering Number MEL7XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3-0-2 [4]
Offered for B.Tech./M.Tech/Ph.D. Type M.Tech
Elective
Prerequisite B.Tech
Objectives 
This course is designed- 
1. to introduce different aspects of power plant engineering such as power plant layout,
operation and safety principles
2. to provide knowledge of the working principle of conversion of different energy
resources into electrical power generation.
Learning Outcomes 
The students will acquire, 
1. ability to select an appropriate type of power plant for given requirements under
different situations
2. skills for optimization of energy efficiency of power plants with respect to available
resources and energy requirements.
3. ability to analyze the working and layout of power plants and the various components
comprising the plant.
Content: 
Introduction to power plant engineering: Sources of energy, National and International 
status on power generation [Lectures 2]. 
Thermal Power Plant: Plant layout, Thermal power plant equipment, Types of boilers, the 
performance of boilers, supercritical steam generator, the performance of condensers, types 
of steam turbines, draught system [Lectures 8]. 
Gas Turbine Power Plant:  Classification and cons truction layout, Principles of clo sed and 
open cycle gas turbines [Lectures 4]. 
Combined cycle power plants:  Load type and calculation, Load variation, Use of internal 
combustion engine plant, Plant layout and design calculation, combined cycle efficiency  
[Lectures 5]. 
Nuclear power plant: Principles of nuclear energy, Elements of nuclear power plants, Types 
of nuclear fuel, nuclear reactor, Boiling Water Reactor, Pressurised Water Reactor, 
Pressurised Heavy Water Reactor, Fast breeder reactors, Next genera tion nuclear plant  
[Lectures 6]. 
Hydroelectric power plant: Plant layout, water turbine, plant operation, water storage and 
flow duration, hydrographs, Low, medium and high head plants, pumped storage plants, 
Penstock, water hammer, surge tanks, gates and valves, power house [Lectures 6]. 
Site selection: Selection of for power station, load estimation, load duration curve, load 
factor, capacity factor, use factor, diversity factor, demand factor, Effect of variable load on 
power plant, selection of the number and size of units [Lectures 4]. 
Economics and Environmental Considerations:  Capital cost, Cost of energy production, 
Operational cost of power plants, tariffs for electrical energy, Environmental impact, different 
types of pollution, fuel availability [Lectures 3]. 
Electrical components of power plants:  generator, transformer, speed governing 
systems, generator excitation systems, switchyard [Lectures 4]. 
Laboratory Classes [12-13 Classes] 
Steam Power Plant: Start-up, Operation and maintenance, Shut down of Steam Power Plant, 
Control and monitoring. 
Boilers: Efficiency of a steam generator, Analysis of exhaust gas from boiler, Determination 
of the heat flux density and the overall heat transfer coefficient in boilers. 
Steam Turbine: Demonstration of the function of a steam turbine, Operating Characteristics 
of Steam turbine. 
Cooling tower: Determination of cooling capacity, Operating Characteristics of Cooling tower  
Gas Turbine: Determination of specific fuel consumption, Determination of Shaft power and 
System efficiency. 
Reference Books 
1. M. M. Ei-Wakil, Power Plant Technology, Tata McGraw-Hill.
2. P. K. Nag, Power Plant Engineering, Tata McGraw-Hill.
3. F. T. Morse, Power Plant Engineering, D. Van Nostran, New York.
Learning Material 
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112107291/
Energy Storage 
Title Energy Storage Number EE7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–2 [4] 
Offered for M.Tech./Ph.D. Type M.Tech Elective
Prerequisite Introduction to Smart Grid 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1.  1. Provide understanding of various types of energy storage elements, their principle,
characteristics, and applications
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  1. Design suitable energy storage technology as per demand, location, cost and other
parameters.
Contents 
Fractal - 1 
Energy Storage Systems: Introduction of energy storage systems, Energy Demand, 
Energy Storage Methods and comparison [Lectures 4]. 
Thermal energy storage systems: Basic Principle, Thermal energy storage methods, 
Sensible heat storage [Lectures 5]. 
Latent heat storage, phase -change materials, operational aspects, Cold thermal energy 
storage, Seasonal thermal energy storage [Lectures 5]. 
Fractal - 2 
Mechanical energy storage systems: Introduction, Flywheel energy  storage-design and 
components [Lectures 4]. 
Pumped hydropower storage [Lectures 3]. 
Compressed-air energy storage- Specifications of components, classification [Lectures 4]. 
Applications, Technical characteristics in terms of power rating and discharge time, storage 
duration, energy efficiency, energy density, cycle life, lifetime, capital cost, etc. [Lectures 
3]. 
Fractal - 3 
Electrochemical/chemical energy storage: Introduction, rechargeable batteries and their 
electrochemistry, types of batteries - integration into electrical grids, performance, 
characteristics, off-grid systems - sizing - small scale battery storage s ystems, recycling 
technologies, battery testing, battery management, regulations and safety aspects of high 
voltage batteries, hydrogen energy storage Hydrogen economy, fuel cell, safety [Lectures 
11]. 
Electrical energy storage: Superconducting magnetic energy storage systems - principles, 
materials, performance, and characteristics, super capacitors [Lectures 3]. 
Laboratory Classes [12-13 Classes] The experiments for the course include: 
Measurement of internal resistance, cold -cranking amps, capacity, s tate of health, charging 
efficiency; Charging and discharging characteristics ; Testing of stater -batteries; Self-
discharge and storage; Effect of temperature on – voltage, capacity, internal resistance, self-
discharge, life; Centralized, distributed, hybrid cell balancing; Design and simulation of charge 
controllers for battery ;  Simulation of battery management system ;  Simulation of different 
models using different software like Siemens Simcenter battery; design studio, Matlab. 
Textbook 
1. Cabeza,L.F., (2015), Advances in Thermal Energy Storage Systems: Methods and 
Applications, Woodhead Publishing 
2. Kalaiselvam,S., Parameshwaram R., (2014), Thermal Energy Storage for Sustainability -
Systems Design, Assessment and Applications, Academic Press 
3. Alami,A.H., (2020), Mechanical Energy Storage for Renewable and Sustainable Energy 
Resources, Springer 
4. Huggins,R.A., (2014), Energy Storage-Fundamentals, Materials and Applications, 2nd edition, 
Springer 
Biomass Energy Conversion 
Title Biomass Energy Conversion Course BBXX 
Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-2 [4]
Offered for Type M.Tech
Elective
Prerequisite 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Illustrate the principles and applications of bio-energy harnessing systems ranging
from conventional processes to the latest developments in the area.
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Have an understanding of the existing and emerging biomass to energy technologies.
2. Utilize the knowledge of bioenergy systems while integrating bioenergy with other
renewable energy systems.
3. Suggest potential solutions for energy needs by incorporating bioenergy technology.
Contents 
Bioenergy context:  Introduction, Biofuels and biopower; automobile and biofuels, 
feedstocks (harvested and residual), Emissions from biofuels [Lecture 6]. 
Thermochemical biomass conversion:  Chemical composition, Biomass types and 
characteristics, Biomass pre-treatment and processing, Combustion, Gasification, Pyrolysis, 
Catalytic conversion of biomass to liquid biofuels, Life cycle analysis [Lecture 14]. 
Biochemical biomass conversion:  Anaerobic fermentation technology: Biogas 
production, process microbiology, different types of bioreactors, basic process kinetics, 
Various types of biofuels,1st and 2nd generation biofuels, Algal Biofuels, ASTM standards for 
biofuels, Engineered microbes for biofuel [Lecture 10]. 
Bioelectrochemical systems: Introduction to Microbial Fuel cells (MFC), Nernst equation 
and electrochemical potential difference, the redox reactions, calculating and measuring 
potentials, The exoelectrogenic microbes, MFC components , Applications of MFC, Bio 
electrochemical system for Hydrogen production, Artificial photosynthesis [Lecture 12]. 
Lab: 
Biomass acid treatment process and estimation of reducing sugars, performing ethanol 
fermentation and determine ethanol yield and productivity, performing butanol fermentation, 
setting up a biogas production process, Screening cellulose producers from natural 
environments, enzyme activity assays for lignocellulosic waste, performing acid 
catalysed/base catalysed biodiesel production -comparison of process kinetics, determine 
biodiesel yield with sequential base/acid treatment for free fatty acid rich microbial oil, Setting 
up Microbial fuel cells. 
Textbooks 
1. German Solar Energy Society, Ecofys, (2006) Planning and installing bioenergy
systems: A guide for installers, architects and engineers, Earthscan,
2. Vertes, A. A., Qureshi, A., Yukawa, H.,  Blaschek, H.P.,(2010) Biomass to Biofuels,
Wiley.
3. H. S. Mukunda, Understanding Clean Energy and Fuels from Biomass, Wiley India
Pvt. Ltd., 2011.
Reference Books 
1. Stanier, R. Y., (2009) General Microbiology, W.H. Freeman and Co.
2. Pelczar, M.J., Chan, E. C. S., Krieg, N.R.,(2001) Microbiology, Tata McGraw - Hill
Education
Online course material 
Michelle O'Malley, Fueling Sustainability: Engineering Microbial Systems for Biofuel 
Production, Spring 2011, MIT OpenCourseWare Massachusetts Institute of Technology,  
https://ocw.mit.edu. License: Creative Commons BY-NC-SA 
Hydrogen and Methanol Economy 
Title Hydrogen and Methanol Economy Number CH7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for MTech, MTech-PhD, PhD Type M.Tech
Elective
Prerequisite none 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide in -depth knowledge about Hydrogen and Methanol production, storage, their
Utility and infrastructure development.
2. Impart knowledge about the economic and environmental viewpoint of using Hydrogen
and Methanol as fuel sources.
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have: 
1. Proper knowledge about Hydrogen and Methanol production and related issues.
2. Economic view point of Hydrogen and Methanol as fuel and the related challenges &
opportunities.
Contents 
Hydrogen and methanol as fuels: General aspects, Prelude to energy systems, Hydrogen 
and Methanol as energy sources, Future energy supply, Economy and Environment, 
Sustainability [Lectures 6]. 
Hydrogen Production Processes : Properties, production, storage, utilization and safely, 
Infrastructure requirement, Hydrogen as a transportation fuel,  Hydrogen based fuel cell 
[Lectures 12]. 
Methanol Production Processes: Properties, production, storage, transportation and 
safely, Infrastructure Requirement, Methanol as fuel and energy carrier, M ethanol as 
automobile, marine and aviation fuel [Lectures 14]. 
Challenges and opportunities:  Indian and global perspectives, Domestic and 
transportation application, Affordable Technology development, Policy [Lectures 6]. 
Case studies: Comparative study with other energy sources [Lectures 4]. 
Textbook  
1. G.  A. Olah, A. Goeppert, G.  K. S. Prakash,(2006),  Beyond Oil and Gas: The Methanol
Economy, Wiley‐VCH, Weinheim, Germany.
2. Ball M. and Wietschel M.,(2009) The Hydrogen Economy Opportunities and Challenges,
Cambridge University Press.
Reference Books 
1. A. Scipioni, A. Manzardo, J. Ren, (2017)  Hydrogen Economy: Supply Chain, Life Cycle
Analysis and Energy Transition for Sustainability, Academic Press.
2. M. Bertau, H. Offermanns, L. Plass, F. Schmidt, H. Wernicke,(2014) Methanol: The Basic
Chemical and Energy Feedstock of the Future, Springer; 2014
Hydropower 
Title Hydropower Number ME7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering, electrical 
Engineering, Civil & Infrastructure 
Engineering 
L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type M.Tech Elective
Prerequisite 
Objectives: 
The Instructor will: 
1. Describe the role of the hydropower and working principles of small- and large-scale
hydropower plants.
2. Provide overview of the practical design of hydropower structures including
mechanical and electrical equipment.
3. Introduce students to geotechnical, mechanical, and electrical engineering aspects
of conventional large dams.
Learning Outcomes: 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Formulate and analyze technical solutions for design, and operation of hydropower
plants.
2. Analyze a technical problems connected to the hydroelectric power industry.
3. Compare the design of dams, mechanical, electric and electronic equipment.
4. Implement design details of embankment dam, components of face rockfill dams
and concrete gravity dam, and basis of dam foundation design.
Fractal 1 (ME) 
Introduction: Hydropower resource, potential and market, Hydropower sites, Types of 
hydropower plants. (Lectures: 2) 
Large hydropower : Run -of-River Hydropower, Dams and Barrages, Dam types 
(Lectures: 3) 
Hydropower turbines, Classification and working principles, Im pulse and reaction 
turbines; Propeller and Kaplan Turbines, Deriaz turbine. (Lectures: 5) 
Tidal power: Tidal barrage power plant, operation and design,  Tidal lagoons, Barrage 
construction techniques, Turbine speed regulation. (Lectures: 4) 
Fractal 2 (EE) 
Hydropower Generators:  Generator poles and rotational speed, orientation, types 
(Lectures: 2) 
Small Hydropower: Small, mini, and micro hydropower plant, generators for small hydro 
power plants (Lectures: 3) 
Electronic Control of Hydropower: Phase angle control, relay switched on loads, Mark -
Space ratio controller (Lectures: 3) 
Pumped Storage Hydropower : Pumped storage hydropower plant, turbines, motors 
(Lectures: 3) 
Hydropower House: Classification, equipment, accessories, layout, components, sizin g 
(Lectures: 3) 
Fractal 2 (CIE) 
Site investigation techniques: Geological environments: rocks and soils; Geological, 
geotechnical, and geophysical investigation; Trenching and drilling (Lectures: 2) 
Design of embankment dams: freeboard; Slope protection; Embankment crest details; 
Dimensioning and tolerances; Conduits through embankments; Flood control 
structures; Seismic stability analysis of embankments; Liquefaction of dam 
embankments and foundations. (Lectures: 4) 
Concrete face rockfill dams and Concrete gravity dams: Selection of dam types; Rockfill 
zones; Concrete face; Construction aspects; Settlements, and displacements of the face 
slab, and joints; Leakage;  Strength and compressibility of rock foundations; Strength 
of concrete in the dam; Strength of the concrete -rock contact; Silt and ice load 
(Lectures: 4) 
Foundation preparation: General foundation preparation for embankment dams; Cutoff 
foundation for embankment dams; Width and batter slopes; Slope modification; 
Foundation preparation for concrete gravity dams. (Lectures: 4) 
Textbook 
1. Breeze,P., (2018), Hydropower, Academic Press
2. Pandey,B., Karki,A., (2017), Hydroelectric Energy, Renewable Energy and the
Environment, CRC Press
3. Robin Fell, Patrick MacGregor, David Stapledon, Graeme Bell (2005) Geotechnical
Engineering of Dams. A. A. Balkema publishers. ISBN 04 1536 440 x.
Fuel Cell Technology 
Title Fuel Cell Technology Number CH7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type M.Tech
Elective
Prerequisite None 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide in-depth knowledge about the fuel cell technology.
2. Discuss the fundamentals of deferent fuel cells.
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have: 
1. Comprehensive knowledge about fuel cell technology.
2. The ability to design different types of cells.
Contents 
Basics of Cell Technology : Principles of fuel cells, Fuel cells systems and staking, 
applications, performance study, electrochemistry and thermodynamics of fuel cells. 
[Lectures 6]. 
Fuel cell kinetics: electrode kinetics, catalysis in fuel cells, activation energy, reaction 
equilibrium, exchange currents and electrocatalysis, design principles of catalyst -
electrode, Sabatier principle [Lectures: 6]. 
Charge and mass transport: resistance and voltage loss, electrical driving force, fuel cell 
electrolytes, diffusive and conductive transport, convective transport. [Lectures: 6] 
Modelling and characterization: Theory and governing equations, basic fuel cell model, 
1D model, CFD application in modelling, characterization techniques of fuel cells, 
physical and chemical methods [Lectures 6].  
Proton-exchange membrane (PEM) Fuel Cell: Cell components, material properties and 
processes; membrane layer, current collector and gas delivery, catalyst action, design 
issues, high temperature and reverse operation, degradation and lifetime. [Lectures: 9] 
Other Fuel cells: Solid Oxide Fuel Cell(SOFC), Phosphoric acid fuel cell (PAFC), Alkaline 
fuel cell (AFC), Solid acid fuel cell (SAFC), Molten -carbonate fuel cell (MCFC), Microbial 
fuel cell, etc., Environmental impact of fuel cells, fuel cell ve hicles, building-integrated 
fuel cells. [Lectures 9]. 
Textbook 
1. Andrew L. Dicks, David A. J. Rand, 2018, Fuel Cell Systems Explained, Willey, Third
Edition.
2. Ryan O'Hayre, Suk -Won Cha, Whitney Colella, Fritz B. Prinz, 2005, Fuel Cell
Fundamentals, Willey, Third Edition.
Reference Books 
1. Bent Sorensen, 2012, Hydrogen and Fuel Cells: Emerging Technologies and
Applications, Elsevier, Second Edition.
2. Frano Barbir, 2013, PEM Fuel Cells: Theory and Practice , Elsevier Inc., Second
Edition.
3. Ryan O'Hayre, Suk -Won C ha, Whitney Colella, Fritz B. Prinz, 2009, Fuel Cell
Fundamentals, Wiley, Second Edition.
Electrochemical Conversion and Storage 
Title Electrochemical Conversion and Storage Number CH7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type M.Tech
Elective
Prerequisite None 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Impart the knowledge of electrochemical engineering, Working principle, materials and
characterization of electrochemical conversion for energy production.
2. Introduce the mechanism to store energy.
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have: 
1. Comprehensive knowledge about electrochemical process.
2. Advanced knowledge about energy production via electrochemical process and store
it efficiently.
Contents 
Introduction: basics of electrochemical Conversions and Storage, devices and Principles, 
over view of fuel cells, Photo-electrochemical conversion and cells. [Lectures: 5] 
Batteries for energy storage:  primary and secondary batteries, limitations of battery 
performance, Lead Acid Battery, Nickel -Metal Hydride (Ni -MH) Rechargeable Batteries, 
Lithium-Ion Rechargeable Batteries, Liquid- Redox Rechargeable Batteries. [Lectures: 10] 
Electrochemical supercapacitor: intro duction to supercapacitor, types and structures,  
Transport Properties, electric double -layer capacitor, physical/elcrochemical processes in 
supercapacitors, diffuse layer, pseudocapacitor. [Lectures: 11] 
Electrodialysis: introduction to electrodialysis an d reverse electrodialysis, control 
parameters, effect of flow structure. [Lectures: 4] 
Electrochemical Hydrogen Production: Introduction to electrolysis, electrolysers and 
hydrogen production, PEM water electrolysers, electrochemical reforming of alcohol,  
perspectives of hydrogen electroproduction techniques. [Lectures: 12] 
Textbooks 
1. Vladimir S. Bagotsky, Alexander M. Skundin, Yurij M. Volfkovich, 2015,
Electrochemical Power Sources: Batteries, Fuel Cells, and Supercapacitors, Wiley.
2. Jiujun Zhang, Lei Zhang, Hansan Liu, Andy Sun, Ru -Shi Liu, 2011,  Electrochemical
Technologies for Energy Storage and Conversion, Wiley-VCH, First Edition.
3. Allen J. Bard, Larry R. Faulkner, 2001, Electrochemical Methods: Fundamentals and
Applications, John Wiley & Sons, Second Edition.
Reference Books 
1. Keith Scott, 2020, Electrochemical Methods for Hydrogen Production, RSC, UK.
2. Stanley W. Angrist, 1982, Direct Energy Conversion , Allyn and Bacon Inc.
Selected Topics in Distributed Generations 
Title Selected Topics in Distributed Generations Number EE7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P
[C]
3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type M.Tech
Elective
Prerequisite 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide salient concepts of DG operation and control in both grid connected and
autonomous modes
2. Provide exposure to the challenges related to stability, grid integration, and
ancillary services in distributed generation
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Develop control schemes for distributed generators to operate in grid connected
and autonomous mode
2. Understand various challenges and propose solutions related to stability, grid
integration and ancillary services in distributed generation
Contents 
Distributed generation: Introduction, DG types, concept of inertia and frequency 
response, flexibility issues, ramping issues (Lectures: 3) 
Control of distributed generation: Modelling and control of distributed energy 
sources such as solar PV, wind energy, diesel generator (Lectures: 10) 
Microgrids: Concept of microgrid, microgrid benefits, typical structures and 
configurations of various microgrids (Lectures: 3), control of converters in DC and 
AC microgrids (Lectures: 4), act ive and reactive power control, voltage and 
frequency control of inverter -based sources (Lectures: 3), virtual synchronous 
generators (Lectures: 2) 
Stability: Stability issues with weak grid integration and in microgrid operation 
(Lectures: 4) 
Other challenges in grid integration: Power quality requirements, DG support under 
abnormal grid conditions (Lectures: 3), issues related to islanding and reverse 
power flow, network congestion (Lectures: 5), and protection (Lectures: 2) 
Ancillary services: Ancillary services with DGs, control for ancillary services, virtual 
power plants (Lectures: 3) 
Textbook 
1. Bollean,M.H.J., Hasan,F., (2011), Integration of Distributed Generation in the
Power Systems, Willey-IEEE India Press
2. Masters,G.M., (2004), Renewable and Efficient Electric Power Systems , John
Wiley & Sons, Inc.
3. Bevrani,H., Francois,B., Ise,T., (2017), Microgrid Dynamics and Control , John
Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Materials for Electrochemical Energy Conversion and Storage 
Title Materials for Electrochemical Energy 
Conversion and Storage 
Number 
Department Physics and Metallurgical & Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 2-0-0 [2]
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type M.Tech
Elective
Prerequisite - 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide the student with an extended knowledge of the basic principles and recent
advances in Energy Storage materials and associated technologies for consumer
electronics to high-power applications.
2. Provide the students with the role of materials in energy storage technologies.
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to gain knowledge on: 
1. Different modes of energy conversion and storage with respect to scale, cost, energy
and power density
2. Structure processing property performance relationship of the energy materials
developed over time.
Contents 
Introduction: Overview of electrochemical energy storage and conversion devices, Basic 
terminology, Classification, Applications. (Offered by Physics) (Lectures: 2) 
Batteries: Introduction to Batteries, primary and secondary batteries, Solid-state and liquid 
electrolyte batteries, Lead acid batteries, Nickel Cadmium Batteries, Li -ion and Li-Polymer 
batteries, Intercalation and Conversion Materials , Battery Capacity and Life, Micro -
batteries, Thin film batteries, Materials for high -energy density 2D and 3D batteries 
(Offered by Physics) (Lectures 12) 
Fuel cells: Principle and types, performance characteristics and efficiency of fuel cell, Proton 
exchange fuel cells, Solid oxide fuel cells, Types of solid oxide fuel cells: High and 
intermediate temperature, Single chamber solid oxide fuel cells. Polymer electrolyte fuel 
cells, Acid/alkaline fuel cells, phosphoric acid fuel cell, molten carbonate fuel  cell, fuel cell 
stack, hydrogen storage (Offered by MT) (Lectures: 10) 
Supercapacitors: Difference between Capacitor and Supercapacitor, Electrolyte and 
Electrode materials, electric double layer capacitors, Challenges and Applications (Offered 
by MT) (lectures: 4) 
Textbook 
Cheong K. Y., Impellizzeri G and  Fraga M. A. (2018) Emerging Materials for Energy 
Conversion and Storage, 1st Edition, Elsevier 
Reference Book 
Rosen M. A. (2012) Energy Storage, Nova 
Online Course Materials 
1. Prof. Bazant M., MITopencourseware: Electrochemical Energy Systems, MIT Course
Number 10.626 / 10.426, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/chemical-engineering/10-626-
electrochemical-energy-systems-spring-2014/
2. Prof. Pal K., Selection Of Nanomaterials For Energy Harvesting And Storage Application ,
NPTEL Course Material, Mechanical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee,
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112/107/112107283/
Solar Energy and Applications 
Title Solar Energy and Applications Number MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th
[C]
3-0-0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech Type M.Tech
Elective
Prerequisite B.Tech Degree
Objectives 
This course has objectives- 
1. to familiarize students with the potential of solar energy to meet the growing energy
demands of society in a sustainable way,
2. to elaborate students, the concepts of solar energy applications in architecture and
infrastructure, and
3. to illustrate solar technologies of producing power and cooling/heating in buildings.
Learning Outcomes 
The students will acquire- 
1. understanding of availability and potential of solar energy.
2. knowledge of various means of solar energy utilization technologies and their
applications.
3. enable students to model, design and evaluate solar energy systems and the ir
applications from the fundamental principles and methods.
Content: 
Solar Radiation: Introduction to Solar Radiation, distribution, measurement and data, Sun 
motion, Introduction to Detectors, Radiation on Sloped Surfaces, Principle of conversion of 
solar radiation into heat, Thermal comfort , Introduction to Concentrated Solar Power (CSP) 
Technologies. [Lectures 14] 
Photovoltaics: Photovoltaic (PV) Effect, PV cells, The electrical model of PV cells, effect of 
shading, converters for grid integration of solar PV: DC -DC boost converter and inverter, 
control of boost converter and inverter, MPPT techniques and implementation. Mounting of 
solar panels, design and analysis of solar trees. [Lectures 14] 
Energy Efficient Buildings:  Building orientation and de sign, passive heating and cooling 
concepts, thumb rules, heat transfer in buildings: Thermal modeling of passive concepts, 
Evaporative cooling, Energy efficient windows and daylighting, Earth air tunnel and heat 
exchanger, Zero energy building concept and rating systems, Energy conservation building 
codes, Software for Building Simulation, Automation and Energy Management of Buildings.  
[Lectures 14] 
Reference Books 
1. Solar Engineering of Thermal Processes. John A. Duffie, William A. Beckman. John,
Fourth Edition, Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2013.
2. G.N.Tiwari, Solar Energy. CRC Press, 2002.
3. M.S. Sodha, N.K. Bansal, P.K. Bansal, A. Kumar, and M.A.S.Malik, Solar Passive
Building, Science and Design, Pergamon Press, 1986.
4. Renewable Energy Resources: Basic Principles and Applications. G. N. Tiwari, M K.
Ghosal, Narosa Publishing House, New Delhi, 2004.
Learning Material 
1. Solar Energy Technology https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112/105/112105051/
2. Solar Photovoltaics Fundamentals, Technology And Applications 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/115/107/115107116/
Artificial Intelligence-I 
Title Artificial Intelligence – 1 Number CS 7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type M.Tech
Elective
Prerequisite 
Objectives: The Instructor will: 
Cover various paradigms that come under the broad umbrella of AI, with some of 
them being covered in depth 
Learning Outcomes: The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Develop an understanding of where and how AI can be used 
Contents 
Introduction [Lecture 1]. 
Propositional logic [Lectures 8]. 
Search: Uninformed strategies (BFS, DFS, Dijkstra), Informed strategies (A* 
search, heuristic functions, hill -climbing), Adversarial search (Minimax algorithm, 
Alpha-beta pruning) [Lectures 10]. 
Predicate logic: Knowledge representation, Resolution [Lectures 6]. 
Rule-based systems: Natural language parsing, Context free grammar [Lectures 
3]. 
Constraint satisfaction problems [Lectures 4]. 
Planning: State space search, Planning Graphs, Partial order planning [Lectures 4]. 
Uncertain Reasoning: Probabilistic reasoning, Bayesian Networks, Dempster-Shafer 
theory, Fuzzy logic [Lectures 6]. 
Textbook 
Russel,S., and Norvig,P., (2015), Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, 3rd 
Edition, Prentice Hall. 
Reference books: 
Research literature 
Self-Learning Materials 
1. Department of Computer Science, University of California, Berkeley,
http://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLD52D2B739E4D1C5F
2. NPTEL: Artificial Intelligence, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106105077/