Source: http://intra.iitj.ac.in/acad_website/intra/Final_ConceptNote_HSS_2021%20with%20all%20modifications%20_13.01.2022.pdf
================================================================================

1 
 
 
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
Department of HSS 
Concept Note on Role of HSS in Engineering curriculum and HSS 
Courses 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2 
 
 
 
1. Introduction 
The Department of Humanities and Social Sciences (HSS) plays a unique role in an Institute where 
the ethos of Science and Technology is predominant. Within the coordinates of the IIT system, the 
Department   offers a unique scope to study and comprehend th e critical role of technology within a 
socio-cultural context. With faculty members who specialize in diverse disciplines and students from 
a spectrum of backgrounds, the Department provides an enriching platform where technical education 
can be complemented with human and social understanding. 
 
Furthermore, the Department, with its faculty from a wide spectrum of diverse disciplines, paves the 
way for learning and discussions on multiple issues ranging from the rigor of analysis to engagement 
with multiple  cultures, individual struggles, political trends, dialogue and reasoning.  Thus, the 
Department of HSS facilitates a well -rounded and expansive point of view amongst the student 
community. These young minds that come in contact with varied knowledge syste ms are likely to 
evolve into reflective and thinking individuals with refined sensibilities. Such a process is expected to 
enable them to appreciate life more creatively, effectively, and holistically and contribute in a positive 
way to the nation at large. 
 
 
2. Objectives   
The IIT system and fraternity was set up in order to create the scientific-technological sensibility that 
was necessary for a newly independent developing nation.  It has never been about a mere production 
of technocrats. The humanities  and social science disciplines offer IIT undergraduates a holistic and 
self-reflective education, making them suitable for a changing global education and work ecosystem 
where disciplinary boundaries perish and interdisciplinarity emerges as the new norm. To achieve that, 
the HSS education in the IITs introduces students to processes of knowledge production in the 
discipline and makes them reflect on the interconnectedness that exists between different disciplines. 
What we seek to create is an exciting bod y of new knowledge that will allow us to operate from 
unbiased –unconstrained – free thinking spaces. 
 
 
3. Expected Graduate Attributes 
A student who has completed HSS electives in the curriculum is expected to have the ability to:  
a. Develop finer sensibilit ies, experience the nuances of creativity and the power of 
imagination 
b. Appreciate and analyses modes of engagement with diverse aesthetic and cultural forms  
c. Understand diversity of values, thought and accept differences. 
d. Empathize with diverse aspects of human endeavor and to be sensitive to societal needs. 
 
 
4. Learning Outcomes 
A student, after having HSS education in the IIT system, is supposed to: 
a. Identify and understand social issues and devise socio -technical solutions built on social 
awareness and informed imagination. 
b. Become a pragmatic individual who can contribute in creating sustainable futures.  
c. Gain awareness of rights as a citizen and location within the wider social context 
d. Reflect critically on own disciplinary biases 
e. Develop a sense of interd isciplinarity and acquaint herself with the various processes of 
knowledge production 
 
 
5. Skillsets targeted 
Creative Thinking, Empathy, Reflective Learning, Engaging with Society, Critical thinking, Logical 
Reasoning, Argumentation, Metacognitive Ability, Imagination, Ethical Sensibility, Scientific Thinking 
  
 
6. Topic clouds and Mapping of Topic clouds with proposed courses 
 
HSS Bouquet I: Literature 
Objectives: The courses at this level will 
3 
 
a. Expose students to a global canvas in literature. 
b. Inculcate an appreciation for diverse literary works including those from cultures outside the 
Anglophone world. 
 
Learning Outcomes: On completing courses at this level, students are expected to have the ability 
to: 
a. Develop a sensibility for literature as an aesthetic form. 
b. Critically analyze and locate literary texts within cultural contexts. 
 
HSS Bouquet II: Sociology, History, Political Science 
Objectives: The courses at this level will 
a. Educate students about (global) society, history, politics and culture. 
b. Sensitize students on issues of gender and social stratification. 
c. Raise awareness on impact of science and technology on society. 
 
Learning Outcomes: On completing courses at this level, students are expected to have the ability 
to: 
a. Critically conceptualize society, culture and politics. 
b. Understand disciplinary biases in scientism, technology and engineering. 
 
HSS Bouquet III: Economics, Management, Public Health 
Objectives: The courses at this level will 
a. Provide the basic foundation of Economics for understanding the interplay of demand and 
supply. 
b. To use simple economic theories to analyse and understand  decision making processes by 
governments, organizations and individuals. 
c. Provide understanding of India’s health care system with special focus on health economics 
and financing. 
 
Learning Outcomes: On completing courses at this level, students are expected to have the ability 
to: 
a. Understand the functioning of the Economy: its structure and components. 
b. Understand the economics behind the common phenomena like inflation, unemployment, GDP, 
recession. 
c. Understand the health system and its various components in India. 
 
HSS Bouquet IV: Philosophy, Policy, Governance 
Objectives: The courses at this level will 
a. Make students be sensitive to dilemmas in professional, personal and social life.  
b. Develop logical and critical thinking. 
c. Make students aware of the dynamics of policy deliberation and implementation. 
Learning Outcomes: On completing courses at this level, students are expected to have the ability 
to: 
a. Develop ethical and aesthetic sensibility. 
b. Nurture finer fibers that bind social harmony and integrity 
c. Ability to imagine and propose structural changes that are conducive to sustainable 
development. 
 
 
Course list in HSS Bouquets 
SN Bouquet I Bouquet II Bouquet III Bouquet IV 
1. Short stories from 
around the world 
Introduction to 
sociology 
Microeconomics 1 
(AIDE-CMCE) 
Introduction to 
Philosophy 
2. Regional literature 
in translation 
Digital Society Microeconomics 2 
(AIDE-CMCE) 
Fundamentals of logic 
3. Creative writing Urban Sociology  Health Economics  Critical Thinking 
4. Postcolonial Fiction Indian Society: A 
sociological 
introduction  
Industrial Organization Cognitive Semantics 
5. Short Fiction from 
India 
Youth studies  Health and 
Development 
Philosophical Problems 
4 
 
6. Science Fiction Law and Society Indian Economic 
Development and 
Policy 
Introduction to Indian 
Philosophy 
7. Introduction to 
Theatre 
Sociology of Work 
and Industry  
Political and 
Institutional 
Economics of 
Development 
Theories of justice 
8. Short Fictions from 
South Asian 
Diaspora 
Development and 
Environment 
Foundations and 
Finance 
Gandhian Thought 
9. Classic Detective 
Fiction 
Social Stratification Individual and 
Strategic Decision 
Making (AIDE-CMCE) 
Role of Technology in 
Development 
10.   Social and Economics 
Networks (AIDE -
CMCE) 
Disasters, Risk 
Reduction, and 
Management 
11.   Behavioral Economics 
and Decision Theory 
(AIDE-CMCE) 
Political and Cultural 
Ecology 
 
  
Table 1. Topics and Mapping of Topic with Courses 
 
Area Topics Course [Humanities 
Electives (IH)/Open 
Electives 
(OE)/Specialization 
Core/Electives (SC/SE)] 
Literature Short story, short fiction, world literature, 
transnational literature, twentieth -century, 
Anglophone writing, modernism, magic realism 
Short Stories from around 
the World (IH) 
Regional literatures in translation, regional literature, 
comparative analysis, translation, transliteration, 
literary cultures, multilingual literary cultures 
Regional Literature in 
Translation (IH) 
Creative imagination, writing, creativity, genres of 
writing, writing workshop, composition, writing craft, 
plot, scene, dialogue, memoir, screenplay, short 
fiction, writing prompts, creative nonfiction, 
publishing 
Creative Writing (IH)  
British Colonialism, Indian writers in English, Indian 
novels, short stories by Indian writers, Indian 
diaspora fiction, Victorian era, globalization, Indian 
national identity, regional contestations, 
autobiographical novel, historical novel, Indian 
fantasy fiction, Independence and Partition, caste, 
identity politics, subaltern fiction, writing from the 
margins, postcolonial theories 
Postcolonial Fiction (IH) 
Short fiction, Creative imagination, South Asia, 
Brevity, Flash fiction, fiction, plot, scene, narrative, 
literary and popular fiction, genre fiction 
Short Fiction from India 
(IH) 
Science fiction, dystopia, apocalyptic fiction, world 
wars, time travel, man vs. machine, humanity and 
technology, progressivism and Science fiction, alien 
life, metaphorical thinking 
Science Fiction (IH) 
5 
 
Area Topics Course [Humanities 
Electives (IH)/Open 
Electives 
(OE)/Specialization 
Core/Electives (SC/SE)] 
Theatre/drama, text/performance, Aristotelian  
theatre, Brechtian/epic theatre, theatre of the absurd, 
biomechanics, poor theatre, theatre of the oppressed, 
third theatre, Indian theatre histories 
Introduction to Theatre 
(IH) 
South Asian diasporic literature, immigration of South 
Asians, cultural identity, notions of home and 
belonging, model minority, gender and sexual 
identity, experiences of dislocation and acculturation, 
queer diaspora. 
Short Fictions from South 
Asian Diaspora (IH) 
 
War literatures, Speculative fiction, Novel of Crime, 
Thrillers, Intrigue, Spy fiction, Espionage, War 
literatures. 
Classic Detective Fiction 
(IH) 
Popular literature, popular culture, from text to film, 
comparative analysis, literary genres, genre analysis, 
classical literature 
Popular classics (OE) 
Basic aspects of film aesthetics, film and other arts, 
film criticism and appreciation, film history (early 
cinema, classical Hollywood, Italian Neorealism, 
French New Wave), introduction to film theory 
(classical and post -classical), Third Cinema, Indian 
cinemas, digital cinema 
Introduction to Film Studies 
(OE) 
Dalit studies, Ambedkar’s writings, Gandhi-Ambedkar 
debate, concept of untouchability and its philosophical 
explorations (Aniket Jaaware and others), anti -caste 
movements in North, West and South India, dalit 
identity and politics, dalit literatures from 
Maharashtra (Namdeo Dhasal, Sharankumar Limbale) 
and South India 
Dalit Movement and 
Literature (OE) 
Introducing Emergency, historical trajectory, 
literature review, cinema, cine -politics and cultural 
politics, censorship, state sponsorship and film 
economy, Indian cinemas in the 1970s, globalization 
of the dictatorial in the 1970s, digital remembering  
Cine-politics under the 
National emergency (OE) 
 Literary history, literary terms and genres, literary 
cultures in history, impact of technology on literature, 
history of publishing, linguistic analysis, discourse 
analysis, semantics, South Asian literatures, oral and 
print cultures in literature 
Perspectives in Language 
and Literary Studies (DH) 
(OE) 
Introduction to the world of publishing with both its 
practical and creative aspects. The course also 
prepares students for the different kinds of 
opportunities they could explore after the conclusion 
of their degrees, and the publishing industry, as an 
emerging field, could be one such avenue.   
Introduction to Editing and 
Publishing (OE) 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Area Topics Course [Humanities 
Electives (IH)/Open 
Electives 
(OE)/Specialization 
Core/Electives (SC/SE)] 
Film history and historiography, colonial history,  
national history, ideological history, institutional  
history, biographical -historical, economic history,  
exhibitional history, global history, film  
anthropology/ethnography, genre, corporeal and  
spatial history 
Indian Cinemas: Many 
Histories (OE) 
Introduction to literatures from the eight ecological -
rich states in India’s Northeast by weaving a narrative 
of political fragility, oral tradition, and collective 
memories while dispelling the misconceptions about 
this heterogeneous region 
Introduction to Literatures 
from India’s Northeast (OE) 
 
 Introduction to visual arts, Art history and major art 
movements in  Europe (from classical to modern), 
Histories of ancient and medieval Indian art, 
Renaissance perspective and Indian resistance, Major 
Indian artists and art groups, visual art, experimental 
cinema, installation art, new modes of exhibition 
Introduction to  
Contemporary Arts (OE) 
 Introduction to performance, performance theories, 
performance history through the ages, classical 
drama, Renaissance drama, dramaturgy, playgoing 
cultures, theatre movements and modernism, acting 
styles, absurd theatre, theatre -cinema interface, 
classical Indian theatre, Indian theatre in colonial and 
postcolonial times  
Introduction to 
Performance Studies (OE) 
 
 
 
 
 
Post-Independence theatre and institutional histories, 
urban/folk, theatre in the long 1960s,  major 
playwrights and select plays, production 
histories, film adaptation of theatrical texts,  political 
theatre, third theatre, theatre after globalization 
Modern Indian Theatre 
(OE) 
 Introducing different genre of Asian American 
literature, close textual reading and conversation. 
Asian American Lite rature 
(OE) 
 Introducing world literature, World literature and its 
complexities, Cinema and the translation, 
Contemporary categories 
World Literature and Global 
Cinema (OE) 
Sociology, 
History, 
Political 
Science 
  
Sociological Theories and Perspectives; Social 
Structures, Social Institutions (Family, Marriage, 
Education, Religion, Economy); Social Stratifications 
(Ethnicity, Race, Class, Caste, Gender); Social 
Inequalities; Social processes (Migration and 
Mobilities); Community, Globalisation and 
Environment; People, Places, and Technology 
Introduction to Sociology 
(IH) 
7 
 
Area Topics Course [Humanities 
Electives (IH)/Open 
Electives 
(OE)/Specialization 
Core/Electives (SC/SE)] 
Digital components of a connected society; new forms 
of power; Data as sociomaterial objects; Digital 
identities; Urban informatics and sociological 
imagination; Digital healthcare, mobility, Digital 
heritage; Networks and cultural imaginary; 
Information capital, information management 
Digital Society (IH) 
History of Urbanization, Concept of urbanization, Re -
settlement colonies, Urban poor, urban 
infrastructures, mobilities, Urban markets, Riots and 
the city, case study of New Delhi and its importance 
in urban studies 
Urban Sociology (IH) 
Caste, Class, social stratification, Indian economy and 
polity, traditional systems of administration, Tribes, 
Green revolution, Studies of urban areas, Rural 
sociology, Marriage, Family and Kinship, Mobility in 
cities 
Indian Society: A 
sociological introduction 
(IH) 
Youth movements, relationships, youth subcultures, 
youth and technology, social media, identity 
Youth studies (IH) 
Sociology of Law, Legal Language, Morality, Justice, 
Social Deviance, Multiple legalities 
Law and Society (IH) 
Industry, work, sociology of work, trade unions, labor, 
new work, technology and new forms of work and 
labor, labor rights today, labor and technology 
Sociology of Work and 
Industry (IH) 
Natural Resource Management, Gender, Policy, 
Governance, Law, Environment Movements, 
Development Discourses  
Development and 
Environment (IH) 
Class analysis and class structures, and 
transformations, Theories on caste with empirical 
focus on India, Stratification and Gender, Racem 
ethnicity and stratification 
Social Stratification (IH) 
Classical Sociological thinkers, Structural 
Functionalism, Conflict Theories, Modernity and 
postmodernism, Globalization, Cultural Theory, 
Materialism, Theories of Consumption 
Globalization and culture 
(OE) 
 Science and Technology studies, Ethnography of a 
laboratory, social construction of reality, social 
construction of nature, Discrimination in science, 
Actor Network Theory, Anthropology of non -humans, 
ecological understanding of world, Science and 
technology is colonial India, Science and Governance 
in India, History and Philosophy of Science and 
Technology, Technology and Art 
Sociology of Science and 
Technology (OE) 
Concept of culture, cultural studies: theories and 
debates, popular culture, identity, visual and audio -
visual cultures, heritage and conservation, intangible 
heritage, fine arts, music, literary arts, oral traditions 
Culture, Art and Heritage 
(OE) 
8 
 
Area Topics Course [Humanities 
Electives (IH)/Open 
Electives 
(OE)/Specialization 
Core/Electives (SC/SE)] 
Gender as social construction; Gender in Colonial 
History; Gender across geo-social scales; Gender and 
Migration; Feminisms; Gender, Science, and 
Technology (Household technologies; Medical 
technologies; Communication technologies); Video 
Games; Imagining and Representing Gender; Gender 
in Literature and Culture; Postcolonial Studies; 
Normativity, Subversions, and Queer Studies; Global 
Gender Politics 
Gender and Society (OE) 
Economic
s, 
Managem
ent, Public 
Health 
Preferences, utility theory, cardinal vs optimal 
approaches, utility maximization problem, cardinal vs 
ordinal approaches, expenditure minimization, 
demand analysis, integrability and recoverability, 
weak axiom of revealed preference, producer theory, 
welfare theorems, market structures, general 
equilibrium: introductory.  
Microeconomics 1 (AIDE -
CMCE) (IH) 
Game theory: overview, information economics, 
auctions and mechanism design problems, general 
equilibrium theory 
Microeconomics 2 (AIDE -
CMCE) (IH) 
Economics of health; Microeconomic and 
macroeconomic theory of health sector; 
Understanding health systems; Health insurance 
schemes. 
Health Economics (IH) 
Introduction to concepts for economic analysis; 
market structures and strategic techniques; price 
discrimination; static and dynamic competition; 
product differentiation; entry, accommodation and 
exit.  
Industrial Organization (IH) 
Concepts of health and development; Wellbeing of the 
world; Inequalities in health, and social determinants 
of health; Impact of globalization on health; Health, 
development and challenges in India. 
Health and Development 
(IH) 
Exploration of current and evolving policy debates in 
the backdrop of issues pertaining to economic 
development of India. 
Indian Economic 
Development and Policy 
(IH) 
Importance and role of institutions, politics and 
society in economic growth and development, Impact 
of intricately-related institutional and political aspects 
on decisions and actions, society and the economy. 
 
Political and Institutional 
Economics of Development 
(IH) 
Basics of Money, Banking and Financial Markets, 
basics of personal finance, working of finance 
Foundations of Finance (IH) 
Introduction to strategic games, strict and weak 
domination, rationalizability and iterated elimination, 
Nash equilibrium, correlated equilibrium, Bayesian 
games, extensive form games, games with imperfect 
Individual and Strategic 
Decision Making (AIDE -
CMCE) (IH) 
9 
 
Area Topics Course [Humanities 
Electives (IH)/Open 
Electives 
(OE)/Specialization 
Core/Electives (SC/SE)] 
information, backward induction,  repeated games, 
Folk theorems. 
Introduction to networks, representing and 
measuring networks, random networks, network 
games, economic applications 
Social and Economic 
Networks (AIDE -CMCE) 
(IH) 
 Rational choice, important axioms in choice theory 
and their relevance in characterizing choice, decision 
theory models with boundedly rational agents, 
stochastic choice models, decision making under 
uncertainty, applications of decision theory in AI.  
Behavioral Economics and 
Decision Theory (AIDE -
CMCE) (IH) 
Principles, measurements, and diseases burden;  
Concepts of global health, and its relevance; 
Determinants of global health and policy; Medical 
technologies; Cross -cutting global health themes; 
Global health institutions. 
Global Health (OE) 
Making health policy; Evolution of India’s Health 
policy; Understanding health system; Healthcare 
financing. 
Health Policy, Systems and 
Financing (OE) 
 Making Health Policy, Evolution of India’s Health 
Policy, Understanding Health System, Healthcare 
financing, National Level Secondary Health Data Sets 
Healthy Policy, Systems 
and Financing (OE) 
Philosoph
y, Policy, 
Governan
ce 
Wisdom, Insight, Foresight, Intellectual Traditions, 
Western Philosophy, Eastern  Schools of Thought, 
Contemporary Philosophy, Major Philosophical Issues 
Introduction to Philosophy 
(IH) 
Truth and Validity, Reasoning, Propositional Logic, 
Predicate Logic, Aristotelian Logic, 
Fundamentals of logic (IH) 
 Informal fallacies, cognitive biases, Cognitive 
Unconscious, Dual Processing 
Critical Thinking (IH) 
Language, Metaphors, Meaning and Conceptual 
Structure 
Cognitive semantics (IH), 
Epistemological problems, Metaphysical Problems, 
Theodicy, Ethical Dilemmas, Meaning of Life 
Philosophical Problems (IH) 
Indian Intellectual Tradition, Salient Features of 
Indian Philosophy, Major Schools of Thought, 
Classical and Contemporary Thinkers 
Introduction to Indian 
Philosophy (IH) 
Concepts of Justice, Distributive Justice, Procedural 
Fairness, Global Justice, Intergenerational Justice, 
Restorative Justice, Grounds of Justice 
Theories of justice (IH) 
Significance of Gandhian Thought; Major Works and 
Ideas of Gandhi; Gandhian Concept of Peace and 
Nonviolence; The Triad; Eleven Virtues; Idea of 
Progress and Development; Political Thought; Politics, 
Law and Morality; Contemporary Relevance 
Gandhian Thought (IH) 
10 
 
Area Topics Course [Humanities 
Electives (IH)/Open 
Electives 
(OE)/Specialization 
Core/Electives (SC/SE)] 
 History of development, Concept of Development, 
Planning in India, Technology as key for India’s 
development, Low carbon economy 
Role of technology in 
development (IH) 
Natural Disasters and Pandemics, Natural Resource 
Management, build back better, vulnerability, 
foresight, risk, resilience livelihoods, National -state 
policies, geo -politics, international aid, CSOs, GIS, 
emerging technologies 
Disasters, Risk Reduction, 
and Management (IH) 
Social construction of nature, natural resource 
management and conservation, development, 
degradation and marginalization, neoliberalism and 
environmental governance 
Political and Cultural 
Ecology (IH) 
Development of Intellectual Traditions; History of 
Sciences; Critical Thinking; Analytic Tradition; 
Paradigmatic Shifts; Scientific Temper; Limits of 
Scientific Explanations 
History and Philosophy of 
Science (OE) 
The idea of sustainability; emergence and scope of 
sustainability science; basic principles of sustainable 
development; seminal works, documents and 
declarations;  technological imperatives and social 
imperatives; sciences, values and value of sciences; 
plausible applications of technologies and 
sustainability concerns; energy, society, and 
environment; global pollution and health risks; 
susceptibility assessment; evolutionary roots of 
environmental problems; Social benefits and 
technological risks; perceiving and justifying risks, 
cost-benefit analysis and right based approach; 
uncertainty assessment and precautionary principle; 
sustainable development goals 
Foundations of 
Sustainability (OE) 
 Natural Resource Management, Food Security, 
Agriculture, Migration, Environment, health, Disasters 
Climate Change and 
Society (OE) 
Natural Resource Management, Conflict, Livelihoods, 
Migration, Agriculture, Emerging Technologies, 
pollution, geo-politics, energy, cost-benefit, SDGs 
Politics of water governance 
(OE) 
Other  The nature of beauty and art; Platonic, Aritotelian, 
and Kantian concepts of beauty; aesthetic experience 
and judgment; the su blime; pleasure; existentialist 
perspectives; the genius and creativity; freedom and 
creative expressions; spectator’s vantage point; 
feminist perspectives; the body; postmodern art; 
aesthetics of design; factors in design; industrial 
culture and design of products   
Aesthetics (OE) 
Bioethical problems, professional dilemmas, animal 
and biosphere 
Bioethics (OE) 
11 
 
Area Topics Course [Humanities 
Electives (IH)/Open 
Electives 
(OE)/Specialization 
Core/Electives (SC/SE)] 
 Theories of consciousness, Science and philosophy of 
consciousness, altered states of consciousness, self 
and free will 
Consciousness (OE) 
Introduction to emotion, intelligence, learning, 
memory, forgetting, personality, self, mastery, group 
behavior, stereotype, prejudices, attribution 
Principles of Psychology 
(OE) 
Leadership basics, leader and follower interaction, 
gender and leadership issues, power and leadership 
connection, sources of power, power and unethical 
behavior, development of leadership qualities 
Basics of Leadership (OE) 
Experiential learning-based discussion on soft skill 
like, self-awareness, empathy, emotional intelligence 
and regulation, unhelpful thinking styles, 
assertiveness, positive communication, delegation 
and group management 
Life and Professional Skill 
Development (OE) 
  Concepts and issues related to happiness and 
flourishing, well-being, positive emotion, mindfulness 
and flow, character strength and virtues 
Positive Psychology and 
Wellbeing (OE) 
   Consumption, markets, consumer society, 
commodity culture, consumption and class, material 
culture, overconsumption, consumer citizenship, 
global consumption, commodity flows 
Consumer Culture and 
Commodities (OE) 
   History of Civilizations and role of technology; 
Narratives of Progress; Social Construction of 
Technology - Colonial Technology; Diffusion and 
transfer of technology; Rise of the Internet and Digital 
Societies; Basics of archaeology (concept, methods, 
practices) 
Civilizations, Cultures, and 
Technologies (DH) (OE) 
  Visual Cultures; Images as Performative Space; 
Digital media and Global Image; Images, Power, and 
Resistance; Netnography / Digital Ethnography 
Image, Imaginations, and 
Digital Cultures (DH) (OE) 
  Emerging contours of Digital Humanities, Data and 
Knowledge Representation, Digital Archives 
Fundamentals of Digital 
Humanities (DH) (OE) 
  Introduction to New Media, its theories and histories, 
its social, political and cultural implications; public 
domain and digital commons, network society, online 
streaming and authorship debates, piracy and IP 
rights; media lab as research space; New Medi a and 
Indian/global politics  
New Media Studies (DH) 
(OE) 
  End of celluloid, post -cinema, digital cinema and 
durational principles, slow cinema, emerging domains 
of exhibition and spectatorship, digital film archives 
and databases, streaming platforms and authorship 
debates, digital restoration and preservation, 
experimental cinema-visual art alliance in the days of 
the digital  
Digital Cinema (DH) (OE) 
12 
 
Area Topics Course [Humanities 
Electives (IH)/Open 
Electives 
(OE)/Specialization 
Core/Electives (SC/SE)] 
 Introduction to the field of network cultures that 
revolves around the interaction between new forms of 
networked media technologies, its users, and the 
developing discourses 
Network Cultures 
 Examine the societal structures and expectations 
through which the gendered individual emerges as an 
integrated physiological, psychological, and socio -
political being while locating how the postcolonial 
nation state and masculine behaviours intersect in the 
Global South through in -depth case studies and 
analysis of policy reports as well as cultural artifacts 
related to current environments, health, family, 
relationships, and aging. 
Masculinities in/and the 
Global South 
 Exploration of “Energy humanities” as a rapidly 
emerging field of scholarship that overcomes 
traditional boundaries between the humanities and 
natural sciences and between academic and applied 
research; highlighting the essential contributions, 
insights and methods that the humanities can make 
to areas of study and analysis that were once limited 
and siloed within the natural sciences: with special 
focus on the self -reflexive relationship between 
energy, rationality modernity 
Energy Humanities 
 Psychological theories of intelligence, Social -
Emotional Intelligence, Measuring intelligence, 
different basis of intelligence 
Theories of Intelligence 
(SOI) (OE) 
  Study of advanced mental processes, such as 
organization of knowledge, reasoning, decision-
making, language, problem solving, emotion etc. 
Advance Cognitive 
Processes (SOI) (OE) 
 Modern human-machine systems, knowledge base of 
engineering Psychology, human factor and 
engineering Psychology 
Engineering Psychology 
(OE) 
 Cognitive revolution, object perception and 
recognition, mental processes related to intelligence, 
memory and concept formation, higher mental 
process. 
Cognitive Psychology (OE) 
 Basic of cognitive neuroscience, behavioral measures 
of cognition, neural basis of mental process 
Introduction to Cognitive 
Neuroscience (OE) 
 The culture concept, culture industry, media and 
culture, culture in the digital age, globalization, mass 
culture, popular culture, visual and material culture, 
cultural preservation 
Introduction to Cultural 
Studies 
 Network Concepts, Graph, Connectivity, Software 
tools, NetworkX, Pajek 
Analysis of Social Media 
Networks (DH) (OE) 
 Digital Environment, Application in Teaching, 
Advertising, Training, Immersive Environment 
Digital Storytelling (DH)  
(OE) 
13 
 
Area Topics Course [Humanities 
Electives (IH)/Open 
Electives 
(OE)/Specialization 
Core/Electives (SC/SE)] 
 Anthropomorphism, Multimodal Interfaces, Cognitive 
aspects, Qualitative and Quantitative Evaluation. 
Human Factors in 
Interaction Design (DH) 
(OE) 
* Course in HSS I-IV is available as an open elective also. 
 
 
 
 
7. Summary of Institute wide bouquet of Humanities Courses (Humanities I-4) 
  
Table 2. Area-wise HSS Courses 
 
 
S. No. Stream Courses L-T_P Credit 
HSS1 (All 
courses at 
200 level) 
Literature Short stories from around the world 3-0-0 3 
Regional literature in translation  3-0-0 3 
Creative writing  3-0-0 3 
Postcolonial Fiction 3-0-0 3 
Short Fiction from India 3-0-0 3 
Science Fiction 3-0-0 3 
Introduction to Theatre 3-0-0 3 
Short Fictions from South Asian 
Diaspora 
3-0-0 3 
Classic Detective Fiction 3-0-0 3 
HSS2 (All 
courses at 
300 level) 
Sociology, 
History, 
Political Science 
Introduction to sociology  3-0-0 3 
Digital Society 3-0-0 3 
Urban Sociology  3-0-0 3 
Indian Society: A sociological 
introduction  
3-0-0 3 
Youth studies  3-0-0 3 
Law and Society 3-0-0 3 
Sociology of Work and Industry  3-0-0 3 
Development and Environment 3-0-0 3 
Social Stratification 3-0-0 3 
Economics, 
Public Health 
Microeconomics 1 (AIDE-CMCE) 2-0-0 2 
Microeconomics 2 (AIDE-CMCE) 2-0-0 2 
14 
 
HSS3 (All 
course at 
300 level) 
Health Economics  3-0-0 3 
Industrial Organization 3-0-0 3 
Health and Development 3-0-0 3 
Indian Economic Development and 
Policy 
3-0-0 3 
Political and Institutional Economics of 
Development 
3-0-0 3 
Foundations and Finance 3-0-0 3 
Individual and Strategic Decision 
Making (AIDE-CMCE) 
2-0-0 2 
Social and Economics Networks (AIDE-
CMCE) 
2-0-0 2 
Behavioral Economics and Decision 
Theory (AIDE-CMCE) 
2-0-0 2 
HSS4 (All 
courses at 
400 level) 
Philosophy, 
Policy, 
governance 
Introduction to Philosophy 3-0-0 3 
Fundamentals of logic 3-0-0 3 
Critical Thinking 3-0-0 3 
Cognitive Semantics 3-0-0 3 
Philosophical Problems 3-0-0 3 
Introduction to Indian Philosophy 3-0-0 3 
Theories of justice 3-0-0 3 
Gandhian Thought 3-0-0 3 
Role of Technology in Development 3-0-0 3 
Disasters, Risk Reduction, and 
Management 
3-0-0 3 
Political and Cultural Ecology 3-0-0 3 
 
  
 
8. Open Electives 
Table 3.HSS Open Elective Courses 
 
S.N Courses L-T_P Credit Course level 
1.  Popular classics 3-0-0 3 400 
2.  Introduction to film studies 3-0-0 3 200 
3.  Dalit Movement and Literature 3-0-0 3 700 
4.  Cine-politics under the national emergency 3-0-0 3 700 
5.  Perspectives in language and literary studies (DH) 3-0-0 3 600 
6.  Introduction to Editing and Publishing 3-0-0 3 700 
15 
 
7.  Indian Cinemas: Many Histories 3-0-0 3 700 
8.  Introduction to Literature from India’s Northeast 3-0-0 3 700 
9.  Introduction to Contemporary Arts 3-0-0 3 400 
10.  Introduction to Performance Studies 3-0-0 3 700 
11.  Modern Indian Theatre 3-0-0 3 700 
12.  Asian American Literature 3-0-0 3 700 
13.  World Literature and Global Cinema 3-0-0 3 700 
14.  Globalization and culture 3-0-0 3 400 
15.  Sociology of Science and Technology 3-0-0 3 700 
16.  Culture, Art and heritage 3-0-0 3 300 
17.  Gender and Society 3-0-0 3 700 
18.  Global Health 3-0-0 3 700 
19.  Health Policy, Systems and Financing  3-0-0 3 700 
20.  History and Philosophy of Science 3-0-0 3 700 
21.  Foundations of Sustainability 3-0-0 3 400 
22.  Climate change and society 3-0-0 3 700 
23.  Politics of water governance 3-0-0 3 700 
 Other    
24.  Aesthetics 3-0-0 3 400 
25.  Bioethics 3-0-0 3 400 
26.  Consciousness 3-0-0 3 700 
27.  Principles of Psychology 3-0-0 3 300 
28.  Basics of Leadership 3-0-0 3 400 
29.  Life and Professional Skill development 3-0-0 3 400 
30.  Positive Psychology and Well-being 3-0-0 3 400 
31.  Consumer culture and commodities 3-0-0 3 700 
32.  Civilizations, Cultures, and Technologies (DH) 3-0-0 3 600 
33.  Images, Imaginations, and Digital Cultures (DH) 3-0-0 3 600 
34.  Fundamental of Digital Humanities (DH)  3-0-0 3 700 
35.  New media studies (DH) 3-0-0 3 500 
36.  Digital Cinema (DH) 3-0-0 3 500 
37.  Network Cultures 3-0-0 3 700 
38.  Masculinities in/and the Global South 3-0-0 3 700 
39.  Energy Humanities 3-0-0 3 700 
16 
 
40.  Theories of Intelligence (SOI) 3-0-0 3 400 
41.  Advance Cognitive Processes (SOI) 3-0-0 3 400 
42.  Engineering Psychology  3-0-0 3 400 
43.  Cognitive Psychology 3-0-0 3 400 
44.  Introduction to Cognitive Neuroscience 3-0-0 3 700 
45.  Introduction to Cultural Studies 3-0-0 3 700 
46.  Analysis of Social Media Networks (DH) 3-0-0 3 700 
47.  Digital Storytelling (DH) 3-0-0 3 700 
48.  Human Factors in Interaction Design (DH) 3-0-0 3 700 
49.  Selected Topics in HSS -I 1-0-0 1 700 
50.  Selected Topics in HSS -II 2-0-0 2 700 
51.  Selected Topics in HSS - III 3-0-0 3 700 
  
9. Minor to be offered by the department of HSS 
 Table 4. Specialization and courses 
 
3 S.N. Name of 
Specialization 
Minor Core 
(8 credits) 
 
Topics 
Minor Elective 
(12 Credits) Topics 
 1 
Performing 
and Creative 
Arts  
  
Introduction 
to 
Contemporar
y Arts (3 
credits, 400 
level, 3 -0-0, 
Core) 
 
Approved 
 
 
Introduction to 
visual arts, Art 
history and 
major art 
movements in 
Europe (from 
classical to 
modern), 
Histories of 
ancient and 
medieval Indian 
art, Renaissance 
perspective and 
Indian 
resistance, 
Major Indian 
artists and art 
groups, visual 
art, 
experimental 
cinema, 
installation art, 
new modes of 
exhibition 
  
Indian Theatre 
 
 
(3 credits, 600 
level, 3 -0-0, 
Elective) 
 Natyashastra, Sanskrit 
drama, classical 
theatre,colonial theatre, 
folk performance 
traditions, Tagorean 
drama, Postcolonial 
theatre, Indian theatre in 
the 1960s, Third Theatre 
Introduction 
to 
Performance 
Studies (3 
Introduction to 
performance, 
performance 
theories, 
  
17 
 
credits, 400 
level, 3 -0-0, 
Core) 
Approved 
performance 
history through 
the ages, 
classical drama, 
Renaissance 
drama, 
dramaturgy, 
playgoing 
cultures, theatre 
movements and 
modernism, 
acting styles, 
absurd theatre, 
theatre-cinema 
interface, 
classical Indian 
theatre, Indian 
theatre in 
colonial and 
postcolonial 
times  
  
  
  
  
  
Modern Indian 
Theatre (3 
credits, 700 
level, 3 -0-0, 
Elective) 
Approved 
Post-Independence 
theatre and institutional  
histories, urban/folk, 
theatre in the long 
1960s, major 
playwrights and select 
plays, production 
histories, film adaptation 
of theatrical texts,  
political theatre, third 
theatre, theatre after  
globalization 
    
Project I (3 
credits, 600 
level, 0 -0-6, 
Elective) 
Methodology workshop, 
selection of topics and 
areas, discussion 
sessions, final 
submission 
 
 
Minor Program (Performing and Creative Arts) 
Philosophy: The minor program on Performing and Creative Arts introduces students to theatre and 
performance, classical music, visual and audio-visual art practices (photography, film, installation) in 
order to explore the creative potential that the students may have and also to engage actively with 
Indian traditions in these domains. It is also interested in nurturing and developing the aesthetic 
sensibilities of the students that may help them in sharpening their skills for appreciating art and also 
in finding alternative career options. 
 
Innovative Components: Some of the courses will have tutorials and practical sessions, workshops 
etc. and resource persons from various art and culture industries will be invited fo r the latter. There 
will be interactive sessions between resource persons and students. By the end of the program, there 
will be two elective project courses and students will be allowed to choose any of the three areas 
(visual arts, theatre and performance, classical music) for their respective projects. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18 
 
 
 
Objectives 
a. Nurturing and developing the aesthetic sensibilities of students 
b. Exploring the creative potential of students 
c. Encouraging students in exploring alternative career options 
d. Introducing students to Indian traditions in the spheres of art 
 
Learning Outcomes: At the completion of this minor, students are expected to have the ability to: 
a. Have a basic grasp over performance and art histories/theories in India and abroad 
b. Develop familiarity with modern/contemporary and traditional/classical art forms 
c. Develop acquaintance with Indian art practices and traditions 
d. Develop adequate aesthetic sensibilities to appreciate art 
e. Find suitable methods for indulging in artistic practices of their choice 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10. Detailed Course Content 
of 
Institute Level Humanities Bouquets 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
Institute vide Core Courses: 
 
 
Title Communication Skill I Number HSN 1010 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 0-0-1 [1] 
Offered for UG Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite None     
 Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Facilitate students to gain language competence in order to communicate effectively in 
a spectrum of contexts. 
2. Focus on the two basic skills of language learning, namely: Listening and Reading 
3. Train the student to employ the above skills in both personal and professional settings  
  
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Distinguish between hearing and listening, and to understand listening as a skill of critical 
significance.   
2. Engage effectively in classroom situations and also with various texts, with useful reading 
strategies 
3. Integrate classroom learning into an everyday communicative activity, thus making the 
learning both reflective and experiential. 
  
Listening: Barriers to Listening, Active Listening, Listening and Speaking, Listening and 
Receiving, Listening and Understanding, Listening and Responding, Lis tening and 
Remembering, Listening and Paraphrasing, Listening and Reflecting, Listening to Pre-recorded 
audiovisual aids, Listening to and comprehending audio -visual media including films, radio 
programs, academic and/or public speeches. 
  
Reading: Introduction and application of reading techniques, Comprehension, Types of reading 
including Scanning, Skimming, Critical Reading and Speed Reading, exploration of 
academic/journalistic/creative texts through various reading strategies. 
  
Laboratory Sessions: Will include individual and group activities and hands on experiential 
learning modules 
  
1)    Workshop Session on Listening 
2)    Workshop on Reading, Review and Critical Analysis 
(i)           Film Screening and Discussion 
(ii)          Reading Books, Newspaper Articles, Journals 
  
Total – 21 hours 
  
Textbook 
All reading material for the course will enhance both creative and critical thinking and will 
include the repertoire-newspaper articles, famous speeches, biographies, passages /narratives 
from science and technology, fiction, nonfiction and film, word games and puzzles and will be 
compiled by the instructors and shared with the student. 
  
Reference Books 
1. Bolton. D. (2008). English Grammar in Steps: English Grammar presented, explained 
and practiced in context.Orient Longman. New Delhi: India 
2. Wren PC, Martin H. (2018)  High School English Grammar & Composition . Revised by 
N.D.V. Prasad Rao. S Chand Publishing Blackie. ELT Books, New Delhi: India. 
3. Wren PC, Martin H.(2018) Key to Regular &Multicolor Edition of High School English 
21 
 
Grammar &Composition. Revised by N.D.V. Prasad Rao .S.Chand Publishing Blackie .ELT 
Books, New Delhi: India. 
4. Hewings, Martin (2008) Advanced Grammar in Use. Cambridge University Press. 
Online Course Material 
1. Iqbal, Ayesha.English Language for Competitive Examinations .NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Humanities and Social Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology -Madras,  
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/109106116/ 
2. Choudhary, Shreesh. Better Spoken English.  NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Humanities and Social Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology -Madras, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/109106067/.   
  
 
  
22 
 
Title Communication Skill (II) Number HSN 1020 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 0-0-1 [1] 
Offered for UG Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite None     
 Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Facilitate students to gain language competence in order to communicate effectively in a 
spectrum of contexts. 
2. Focus on the two basic skills of language learning, namely: Speaking and Writing. 
3. Train the student to employ the above skills in both personal and professional settings  
  
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Speak more efficiently and explore the act of writing as an active process. 
2. Articulate with clarity and use better language, well-equipped for specific situations. 
3. Integrate classroom learning into an everyday communicative activity, thus making the 
learning both reflective and experiential. 
 
Speaking: Modes of Communication - Formal and Informal, Verbal and Non-verbal Communication, 
Group Discussions, Mock Personal Interviews, Power point presentations (academic and 
professional/business), Body Language, Basic Phonetics/Pronunciation, and Telephone Etiquette.  
   
Writing: Paragraph Writing, Writing an Email, Note Making, Report Writing, Letter Writing, Reviewing 
articles, Structuring academic/professional writing  
 
Grammar: Identifying Common Errors in English, Use of Articles, Use of Prepositions, Tenses, 
Spellings, Filling in Work Sheets 
Laboratory Sessions: Will include individual and group activities and hands on experiential learning 
modules 
1)    Practice Workshop on Speaking (Group Discussion, Personal Interview) 
2)    Writing Workshop (Essay, Creative Nonfiction/Advertising, Storyboard, Journal Writing, 
Letter & Email Writing) 
3)    Field Visit and Workshop (Photo Essay, Report Writing) 
Total – 21 hours 
Textbook 
All reading material for the course will enhance both creative and critical thinking and will include 
the repertoire-newspaper articles, famous speeches, biographies, passages /narratives from science 
and technology, fiction, nonfiction and film, word games and  puzzles and will be compiled by the 
instructors and shared with the student. 
Reference Books 
1. Bolton. D. (2008). English Grammar in Steps: English Grammar presented, explained and 
practiced in context.Orient Longman. New Delhi: India 
2. Wren PC, Martin H. (2018) High School English Grammar & Composition . Revised by N.D.V. 
Prasad Rao. S Chand Publishing Blackie. ELT Books, New Delhi: India. 
3. Wren PC, Martin H.(2018) Key to Regular &Multicolor Edition of High School English 
Grammar &Composition. Revised by N.D.V. Prasad Rao .S.Chand Publishing Blackie .ELT Books, 
New Delhi: India. 
4. Hewings, Martin (2008) Advanced Grammar in Use. Cambridge University Press. 
Online Course Material 
1. Iqbal, Ayesha. English  Business English Communication .NPTEL Course Materia l, Department of 
Humanities and Social Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology-Madras 
https://nptel.ac.in/noc/individual_course.php?id=noc18-hs18 
2. Ravichandran T. Communication Skills. NPTEL Course Material, Department of Humanities and 
Social Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology- Kanpur. 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/109104031/ 
  
23 
 
 
Title Professional Ethics I Number  HSN3010 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 0-0-1[1] 
Offered for UG Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite None     
Objectives 
The course will: 
1. Foster awareness of ethical responsibilities associated with professions 
2. Assist students in identifying, assessing and resolving ethical dilemmas in professional 
contexts 
3.  Help students becoming responsible professionals 
  
  
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the responsibilities linked to professions 
2. Identify normative commitments of technological knowledge and artifacts 
3.  Think analytically and critically 
  
  
Contents 
Professional Ethics: Basic Notions :  Thinking Like an Engineer; Moral Conflicts and Dilemmas; 
What Morality Is and What Morality Is N ot; Structure of Moral Reasoning; Ordinary Morality 
and Professional Ethics; Tools and Techniques in Ethics; Professionalization and Normative 
Commitments (7 classes) 
Major Moral Problems in Professional Contexts (case study based): Rights, Duties, and Violations; 
Conflicts of Interests; Corruption; Contracts; Obligations in Special Relations; Deception and 
Puffery; Paternalism; Consent and Dissent; Whistleblowing (7 classes) 
  
 Textbook 
1.  Callahan, J.C. (1988), Ethical Issues in Professional Life, New York: Oxford University Press. 
   
Reference Books 
1. Meijers, A. (2009). Philosophy of Technology and Engineering Sciences, Amsterdam: Elsevier. 
2.  Fleddermann, C.B. (2012). Engineering Ethics (4th edition). Boston: Prentice Hall. 
   
Online Resources 
1.  Sa nders, J., Professional Ethics , Rochester Institute of Technology, 
www.openculture.com/philosophy_free_courses 
2. Illinois Institute of Technology, Center for the Study of Ethics in the Professions,  
ethics.iit.edu/library/ethics-resources-online 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24 
 
 
Title Professional Ethics II Number  HSN3020 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 0-0-2[1] 
Offered for UG Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite None     
 Objectives 
The course will: 
1. Foster awareness of ethical responsibilities associated with professions 
2. Assist students in identifying, assessing, and resolving ethical dilemmas in professional 
contexts 
3.  Help students becoming responsible professionals 
  
  
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the responsibilities linked to professions 
2. Identify normative commitments of technological knowledge and artifacts 
3.  Think analytically and critically 
  
  
Contents 
Ethical Issues in Professional Contexts (case study based): Why Should One be Moral; Fairness 
in Discharging Professional Roles; Fair Competition, Hiring Process; Allocation of Burdens and 
Benefits; Risk Assessment; Privacy and Confidentiality; Obligations to Vulnerable Populations 
(9 classes) 
Character, Integrity, and Accountability: Trust, Respect, and Justice as Foundational Values; Role 
of Conscience and Personal Values; Professional Integrity; Laws, Norms, and Professional 
Codes; Social Responsibility; Responsibility to the Environment (5 classes)  
  
  
Textbook 
1.  Callahan, J.C. (1988), Ethical Issues in Professional Life, New York: Oxford University Press. 
  
 Reference Books 
1. Meijers, A. (2009). Philosophy of Technology and Engineering Sciences, Amsterdam: Elsevier. 
2.  Fleddermann, C.B. (2012). Engineering Ethics (4th edition). Boston: Prentice Hall. 
  
Online Resources 
1.  Sanders, J., Professional Ethics , Rochester Institute of Technology, 
www.openculture.com/philosophy_free_courses 
2. Illinois Institute of Technology, Center for the Study of Ethics in the Professions,  
ethics.iit.edu/library/ethics-resources-online 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Institute Level Humanities Bouquets 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26 
 
HSS-I Literature 
Course title Description Course no. 
Short stories from around the world Course content  HSL2XXX 
Regional literature in translation Course content HSL2XXX 
Creative writing Course content HSL2XXX 
Postcolonial fiction Course content HSL2XXX 
Short stories from India Course content HSL2XXX 
Science fiction Course content HSL2XXX 
Introduction to Theatre Course content HSL2XXX 
Short Fictions from South Asian Diaspora Course content HSL2XXX 
Classic Detective Fiction Course content HSL2XXX 
HSS - II Sociology, History, Political Science 
Course title Description Course no. 
Introduction to sociology Course content  HS455 
Digital societies Course content  HSL4XXX 
Urban sociology Course content HSL4XXX 
Indian societies: A sociological introduction Course content HSL3070 
Youth studies Course content HSL4XXX 
Law and society Course content HSL4XXX 
Sociology of work and industry Course content HSL4XXX 
Development and Environment Course content HSL3060 
Social Stratification Course content HSL4XXX 
HSS - III Economics, Public Health 
Course title Description Course no. 
Microeconomics I (AIDE-CMCE) Course content  AIL4010 
Microeconomics II (AIDE-CMCE) Course content AIL4XXX 
Health economics Course content  HSL4070 
Industrial Organization Course content  HSL7XXX 
Health and Development Course content  HSL4XXX 
27 
 
Indian Economic Development and Policy Course content  HSL7XXX 
Political and  Institutional Economics of 
Development 
Course content  HSL7460 
Foundations and Finance Course content  HSL4XXX 
Individual and Strategic Decision Making (AIDE -
CMCE) 
Course content AIL4XXX 
Social and Economics Networks (AIDE-CMCE) Course content AIL7XXX 
Behavioral Economics and Decision Theory (AIDE -
CMCE) 
Course content AIL7XXX 
HSS - IV Philosophy, Policy, and Governance 
Course title Description Course no. 
Introduction to philosophy Course content  HSL4XXX 
Fundamentals of logic Course content  HSL4010 
Critical thinking Course content  HSL4XXX 
Cognitive semantics Course content 32209/HSL4XXX 
Philosophical problems Course content  HSL4020 
Introduction to Indian philosophy Course content  HSL4XXX 
Theories of justice Course content  HSL4XXX 
Gandhian Thought Course content HSL4XXX 
Role of technology in development Course content HS421/HSL4XXX 
Disaster, risk reduction and management Course content  HSL4030 
Political and Cultural Ecology Course content  HSL4XXX 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28 
 
HSS-I Literature 
 
Title Short stories from around the World Number HSL2xx0 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   
Objectives: 
The Instructor will: 
1. Expose the students to the wide array of short fiction as a literary genre from 
around the world. 
2. Facilitate the student to understand and engage with short fiction 
translated into English from diverse nationalities, cultures and contexts. 
3. Engage the students both critically and creatively in order to understand 
human conditions of the past and present in the context of these creations. 
Learning Outcomes: 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Develop interpretative skills and appreciate nuanced literary sensibilities of 
world literatures. 
2. Understand and engage with world literatures, societies, cultures, 
histories and politics. 
3. Reflect on the significance of these plural conversations from around the world 
within the larger framework of literary narratives. 
 
Contents 
Introducing the genre: History, The rise and role of Fiction, Literary Traditions, 
Identities and Cultural trajectories (8 lectures) 
Elements of Fiction: Literary Terms, Plot, Characters, Setting, Narrative Techniques, 
Dialogues, Conflicts, Point of View, Catharsis, Themes, Structure and  
Analysis (10 Lectures) 
Close Textual Readings and Conversations : Saki (3 Lectures), Anton Chekov (3 
lectures) O’ Henry (3 Lectures), Sir Arthur Conan Doyle (3 Lectures), Oscar Wilde 
(3 lectures), Rabindranath Tagore (3 Lectures), Somerset Maugham (3 Lectu res), 
Guy de Maupassant (3 lectures) 
 
Textbooks 
1. World’s Greatest Short Stories (2016) Grapevine India: New Delhi. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Abrams, M.H. (1999, Seventh Edition). A Glossary of Literary Terms ,Heinely and Heinley, 
USA. 
 
Online Course Material 
1. Merin, Simi Raj. Department of Humanities and Social Sciences IIT Madras, 
Introduction to World Literature 
https://swayam.gov.in/nd1_noc20_hs24/preview 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29 
 
Title Regional Literature in Translation Number HSL2xx0 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Expose students to literatures in translation through short stories, poems and novellas that 
have been translated to English from languages such as Urdu, Marathi, Tamil,  Kannada, 
Bengali. 
2. Examine literary translation as a linguistic, cultural, and political exercise.  
3. Engage students in debates about the relationship between original and translated texts.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the significance of translation as an activity for the preservation and translation 
of cultural forms. 
2. Understand and engage with major theories of translation in literature. 
3. Undertake translation exercises to understand its pragmatics and challenges. 
 
Contents 
Why Translation: Diversity of cultural and literary expression, Importance of translation (6 
lectures), Theories of translation, Relationship between original and translated texts (6 
lectures) 
Literature in Translation: Fiction, nonfiction, and poetry in translation (8 lectures), analysis 
of literary merit, translation and cultural specificity (6 lectures) 
Politics of Translation: The cultural politics of translation and representation (6 lectures), 
Translation as craft, Difficult ies and Challenges (6 lectures), Translation Exercises and Activities 
(4 lectures). 
 
Textbooks 
2. Ray, S. and Majumdar, G. (trans.) (1971) The Golden Fortress: Adventures of Feluda, 
Puffin. 
3. Krishnaswamy, S. and Srilata, K. (2007) Short Fiction from South India, Oxford University 
Press. 
4. Shanbag, V. and Perur, S. (trans.) (2015) Ghachar Ghochar, Harper Perennial. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Bassnett, S. and Trivedi, H. (2012), Postcolonial Translation: Theory and Practice, 
Routledge. 
2. Burger, M. and Pozza, N. (2010), India in Translation through Hindi Literature, Peter Lang. 
3. Richman, P. (1991), Many Ramayanas: The Diversity of a Narrative Tradition in South Asia, 
University of California Press. 
 
Online Course Material 
2. Divya, A., Modern Indian Writing in Translation, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Humanities and Social Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology Madras,  
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/109/106/109106173/# 
3. Chandran, M., Introduction to Translation Studies, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Humanities and Social Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur,  
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/109/104/109104050/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
Title Creative Writing Number HSL 2xx0 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG Type Elective 
Prerequisite None     
 Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1.    Expose students to theories of creativity and creative writing in various genres.  
2. Provide writing prompts and exercises to help students overcome writers’ block.  
3. Conduct sessions  where pieces of unfinished writing will be collectively workshopped to 
improve writing craft. 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Explore and analyze what kinds of creative writing have enduring significance.  
2. Use in-class prompts and exercises to improve their writing craft.   
3. Reflect critically on questions of style, mastery and impact in writing.  
  
Contents 
Creativity and Creative Writing: Theories of creativity, forms and sensibilities of writing, creativity 
and cultures, aesthetics in writing, writing styles, writer’s block 
Genres of Creative Writing: fiction, literary and creative nonfiction, creative writing in the Indian 
context 
Writing Exercises: Prompt-based writing, writing based on imitation of forms (mos aic essay, list 
essay, alphabet story, plot, setting up a scene, dialogue, thick description) 
  
Textbooks 
1.    Pamuk, O., (2011), The Naïve and the Sentimental Novelist, Reprint Edition, Vintage 
International. 
2.    Moore, D., (2010), Crafting the Personal Essay: A Guide for Writing and Publishing Creative 
Nonfiction, 1st edition, Writer’s Digest Books. 
  
Reference Books 
 
1.    Didion, J., (2006), We Tell Ourselves Stories in Order to Live, 1st edition, Everyman’s 
Library. 
2.    King, S., (2010), On Writing: A Memoir of the Craft, Scribner. 
  
Online Course Material 
1.    Creative Nonfiction Magazine, Creative Nonfiction Foundation,  
https://creativenonfiction.org 
2.    Kenyon Review, https://kenyonreview.org/ 
3.    Talwar, N., Understanding Creativity, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Humanit ies 
and Social Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay,  
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/109/101/109101017/# 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
31 
 
Title Postcolonial Fiction Number HSL2xx0 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
4. Help students to become familiar with concepts such as colonialism/postcolonialism, 
empire, nation and nationalism, transnational and/or global within the disciplines of 
literary and cultural studies 
5. Help students to develop better acquaintance with some of the most significant 
postcolonial writings in English 
6. Make students develop familiarity with the works of leading postcolonial theorists located 
in Indian and international academia 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
4. Map the trajectory from the age of empire/colonialism to the postcolonial national  to the 
transnational conceptually, culturally and politically 
5. Explore the methodological paradigm shift that the rise of postcolonial studies entails in 
various humanities disciplines 
6. Develop acquaintance with contemporary narratives emerging from the various post - 
colonies 
 
Contents 
Colonialism/Postcolonialism: The age of empire, histories, settler and other colonies, anticolonial 
movements, defining post in the postcolonial, commonwealth, diaspora, miscegenation (7 
lectures) 
 
Postcolonial and other theories: Introducing Homi K. Bhabha (liminality and hybridity), Edward 
Said and his orientalism, Gayatri Spivak’s writings, Benedict Anderson and Partha Chatterjee 
on nation and nationalism, subaltern studies, transnational (12 lectures)  
 
Commonwealth/New/Postcolonial literatures: Selections from Ngũgĩ wa Thiong’o, J. M. 
Coetzee, V. S. Naipaul, Salman Rushdie, Peter Carey (7 lectures) 
 
Indian Instances and the historical trajectory: Selections from R. K. Narayan, Amitav Ghosh and 
Arundhati Roy (7 lectures) 
 
Detailed Study of a Novel : Reading Chinua Achebe’s Things Fall Apart , group reading and 
discussion (9 lectures) 
 
Textbooks 
1. Gandhi, L., (1998), Postcolonial Theory: A Critical Introduction, Allen & Unwin. 
2. Loomba, A., (2015), Colonialism/Postcolonialism, Routledge. 
3. Achebe, C., (1995), Things Fall Apart (Everyman’s Library edition), Knopf Doubleday. 
4. Boehmer, E., and Chaudhuri, R., (eds.) (2011), The Indian Postcolonial: A Critical Reader, 
Routledge. 
Reference Book 
Thieme, J., (ed.) (1996), The Arnold Anthology of Postcolonial Literatures in English, Arnold. 
Online Course Material 
Chattopadhyay, S., Postcolonial Literature, NPTEL course material, Dept. of HSS, IIT Kanpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/noc/courses/noc17/SEM1/noc17-hs12/ 
 
 
 
 
32 
 
 
Title 
Short fiction from India Number HSL2xx0 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives: 
The Instructor will: 
1. Expose the students to the genre of Indian short fiction as a literary genre. 
2. Facilitate the student to understand and engage with Indian short fiction in English from 
diverse Indian languages, authors and periods. 
3. Engage the students both critically and creatively in order to understand human 
conditions of the past and present in the context of these creations. 
Learning Outcomes: 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1 Develop interpretative skills and understand nuanced literary sensibilities and life.  
2 Understand and engage with regional literatures, societies, cultures, histories and politics. 
3.Reflect on the significance of these plural conversations in the context of literary  
narratives. 
 
Contents 
Introducing the genre: History, The rise and role of Fiction and Indian short fiction, 
Literary Traditions, Identities and Cultural trajectories (8 lectures) 
Elements of Fiction: Literary Terms, Plot, Characters, Setting, Narrative Techniques, 
Dialogues, Conflicts, Point of View, Catharsis, Themes, Structure and Analysis (10 Lectures) 
Close Textual Readings and Conversations: Rabindranath Tagore (3 Lectures), Kushwanth 
Singh (3 Lectures), RK.Narayan (3 Lectures), T.Sivasankaran Pillai (3 Lectures), Ruskin Bond 
(3 Lectures),Premchand (3 Lectures), Ambai (3 Lectures), Ismat Chugdai (3 Lectures) 
 
Textbooks 
1. K.R.Srinivasa Iyengar (2013), Indian Writing in English, Sterling Publishers. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Krishnaswamy, S. and Srilata, K. (2007) Short Fiction from South India, Oxford University 
Press. 
 
Online Course Material 
 
1. Divya, A., Short Fiction in Indian Litetature. NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Humanities and Social Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology Madras,  
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/109/106/109106138/# 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
33 
 
 
 
 
  
Title Science Fiction Number HSL2xx0 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Expose students to the emergence and evolution of science fiction as a genre. 
2. Examine key themes explored in science fiction such as advanced technology, techno - 
cultures, human rights, alternate realities, artificial intelligence and the mysteries of the 
universe. 
3. Use seminal works of science fiction to interrogate the role of science and engineering in 
human civilizations. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Identify and understand science fiction as a genre. 
2. Critically investigate key themes explored in science fiction texts. 
3. Debate the implications of science fiction for our lives. 
 
Contents 
What is Science Fiction: The emergence and evolution of science fiction as a literary genre (6 
lectures), Significance and impact of science fiction, Difference between popular and literary works 
of science fiction (6 lectures), Famous works of science fiction (4 lectures) 
Science Fiction as Commentary: Metaphor and allegory in science fiction (4 lectures), 
science fiction and cultural/political commentary, feminism, anarchism and human rights in 
science fiction (8 lectures), representation of human -tech relations in science fiction (4 
lectures) 
Future of Science Fiction: Possibilities and potentials of science fiction (4 lectures), Emerging 
themes in science fiction and adjacent genres (6 lectures). 
 
Textbooks 
1. Le Guin, U. (1969), The Left Hand of Darkness, Ace Books. 
2. Dick, P. (2013), The Minority Report (Collected Stories of Philip K. Dick), Subterranean. 
3. Miéville, C. (2009), The City and the City, Macmillan. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Gunn, J., Barr, M. and Candelaria, M. (2008), Reading Science Fiction, Springer. 
2. Milner, A. (2012), Locating Science Fiction, University of Liverpool Press. 
 
Online Course Material 
1. Science Fiction Resources, Gunn Center for the Study of Science Fiction, Kansas University,  
http://www.sfcenter.ku.edu/resources.html. 
2. Clute, J., Langford, D. and Nicholls, P., Encyclopedia of Science Fiction,  http://www.sf- 
encyclopedia.com/. 
34 
 
Title Introduction to Theatre Number HSL2xx0 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. Help students to become familiar with some of the basic tenets of drama as play-text and 
as a distinctive performance form 
2. Help students to develop acquaintance with some of the most significant performance 
theories and classical, folk and modernist practices in ancient, medieval and modern times 
3. Make students enable to trace the trajectory of these performance forms through Indian 
and European histories 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Map the trajectory of dramatic forms in Indian and international histories 
2. Explore the intricacies of play-texts and their transformation into performative texts 
3. Develop acquaintance with theories of performance that may help them in making 
meaning of performance forms and texts 
Contents 
Introducing theatre : Differences between dramatic text and performance, theatre and its 
inclusivity (performance space, spectator, mise -en-scéne), theatre’s exclusivity as a 
performance form, differences between theatre and cinema (5 lectures) 
Dramatic/Aristotelian Theatre : Aristotelian theatre and its characteristics, tragedy and epic, 
excerpts from Greek tragedies (preferably The Theban plays of Sophocles), the three unities, 
verisimilitude, realist/method acting á la Stanislavksi (7 lectures) 
Brechtian/Epic Theatre: Brecht and his theatre, epic theatr e and its differences with dramatic 
theatre, alienation effect, selections from Brecht’s plays ( The Good Woman of Setzuan /The 
Caucasian Chalk Circle/Mother Courage and Her Children), political theatre (8 lectures) 
Other Theatres: Basic introduction to othe r non-realist theatres/modes of performance such as 
absurd drama, Meyerhold’s Biomechanics, Artaudian theatre, Grotwoski and his poor theatre, 
Augusto Boal and his theatre of the oppressed, Badal Sircar and his third theatre etc. (10 
lectures) 
Indian theat re histories : Classical theatre, Bharatamuni’s Natyashastra, Sanskrit theatre, 
indigenous and folk theatre as traditions and living performance forms, theatre of roots, 
modern Indian theatre in colonial and postcolonial times (12 lectures) 
 
Textbooks 
1. Aristotle, (Longman Study Edition, 2006), Poetics, edited by Amlan Dasgupta, Pearson. 
2. Brecht, B., (1964), Brecht on Theatre: The Development of An Aesthetic , edited by John 
Willett, Eyre Methuen. 
3. Shivaprakash, H. S., (2007), Incredible India: Traditional Theatres, Wisdom Tree. 
4. Hansen, K., (1991), Grounds for Play: The Nautanki Theatre of North India , University of 
California Press. 
5. Lal, A., (2004), The Oxford Companion to Indian Theatre, Oxford University Press.  
 
Reference Book 
Wiles, D., and Dymkowski, C., (eds.) (2013), The Cambridge Companion to Theatre History , 
Cambridge University Press. 
 
Online Course Material 
NPTEL web content on drama available at: https://nptel.ac.in/courses/109/106/109106054/  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
Title Short fiction from South Asian Diaspora Number HSL2xx0 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG Type Elective  
Prerequisite None   
Objectives:  
The instructor will: 
1. Introduce students to the literary works of some well -known authors of the South Asian 
diaspora. 
2. Discuss works by diasporic authors situated in places as diverse as Malaysia, Singapore, 
Britain, South Africa, the Middle East, the U.S., Canada, the Fiji Islands, and the Caribbean.  
3. Focus on the global dispersal of people from India, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, and Pakistan to 
uncover the changing historical, political, socioeconomic, and cultural  contexts  of  South  
Asian immigration, from the nineteenth century onwards. 
4. Discuss issues of transnational cultural flows and long -distance  nationalism to in terrogate 
constructs such as ‘nation’ and ‘nationalism’ in the context of the South Asian diaspora.  
   
Learning Outcomes: 
The students will be able to: 
1. Understand how diasporans configure their notions of home, cultural identity and belonging by 
focusing on  the  experiences  of dislocation, relocation, acculturation and marginalization as 
explored and addressed in these writers’ works. 
2. Develop an  awareness  of  the  relationship between these literary texts and their historical, 
political and cultural co ntexts to gain an insight into the complex, traumatic and fragmented 
history of South Asia.   
3. Notice how  postcolonial  migration  has  radically  reformulated  and  redefined  earlier dynamics 
of migration, creating new relations between cultures of origin and adoption.     
Contents: 
Introducing the genre: Brief history of South Asian immigration, Distinguish between South Asian 
immigrants migrating to settler colonial societies of the US, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, South 
Africa, and the rest of the world, The rise of South Asian diasporic literature, Stereotyping as “model 
minority,” Dual cultural identity, Exclusionary immigration laws, Discussion on the concept of queer 
diaspora to examine how diasporic experiences produces unconventional forms of s exuality and 
gender identity (7 lectures)   
Close Textual Readings and Conversations : Bharati Mukherjee (5 Lectures), Jhumpa Lahiri (5 
Lectures), Rohinton Mistry (5 Lectures), Zulfikar Ghose (5 Lectures), Salman Rushdie (5 Lectures), 
Hanif  Kureishi (5 Lectures), Anita Desai (5 Lectures) 
Textbook:  
Selvadurai, Shyam (Editor), Story-Wallah: Short fiction from South Asian writers , New York 
and Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, 2005. 
Desai, Anita. Diamond Dust, Houghton Mifflin Company, 2000.   
       Mukherjee, Bharati. Darkness. Fawcett Crest, 1992. 
Mukherjee, Bharati. The Middleman and Other Stories. Grove Press, 1988. 
Lahiri, Jhumpa. Unaccustomed Earth. Penguin Random House, 2008. 
Lahiri, Jhumpa. Interpreter of Maladies, Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 1999. 
Mistry, Rohinton. Tales from Firozsha Baag. Faber and Faber, 1992. 
Reference Books: 
1. Ranasinha, Ruvani. Contemporary Diasporic South Asian Women’s Fiction. London: Palgrave 
Macmillan, 2016. 
2. Avtah Brah, "Thinking through the Concept of Diaspora" from  The Post -colonial Studies 
Reader. Bill Ashcroft, Gareth Griffiths and Helen Tiffin (Eds.), The Post -Colonial Studies 
Reader. London and New York: Routledge, 2006.  
3.  Rushdie, Salman. Imaginary Homelands: Essays and Criticism 1981–1991. Granta 
          Books, 1991. 
4. Hall, Stuart. “Cultural Identity and Diaspora.” Identity: Community, Culture, Difference , 
edited  by Jonathan Rutherford, Lawrence & Wishart, 1990 
5. Selvadurai, Shyam. “Introducing Myself in the Diaspora.” Story-Wallah: Short fiction f rom 
South Asian writers. New York and Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, 2005. 
6. Agarwal, Malti (Ed.). English Literature. Voices of Indian Diaspora.  New Delhi: Atlantic 
Publishers & Distributors, 2009. Atlantic Publishers & Distributors, 2009.  
7. Kalra, V. Kaur, R. and Hutynuk, J, (Eds.). “Cultural Configurations of Diaspora.” Diaspora & 
Hybridity. Sage Publications, 2005. 
36 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8. Hua, Anh. “Diaspora and Cultural Memory.” Diaspora, Memory and Identity: A Search for 
Home, edited by Vijay Agnew, University of Toronto Press, 2005, pp. 191–208. 
9. Mishra, Sudesh. “From Sugar to Masala: Writing by the Indian Diaspora.” An Illustrated 
History of Indian Literature in English, edited by Arvind Krishna Mehrotra, Permanent Black, 
2003, pp. 276–294. 
10. Mishra, Vijay. “The Diasporic Imaginary: Theorizing the Indian Diaspora.” Textual Practice, 
vol. 10, no. 3, 1996, pp. 421–447.  
11. Chatterji, Joya and David Washbrook. Routledge Handbook of the South Asian Diaspora . 
London and New York: Routledge, 2013.  
 
Online Course Material  
1. Chattopadhyay, Sayan., Lecture 16: Diasporic Literature. NPTEL Course Material, Department 
of Humanities and Social Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, 
     https://nptel.ac.in/courses/109/106/109106138/# 
37 
 
Title Classic Detective Fiction Number HSL2xx0 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   
Objectives: 
The instructor will:  
1. Explore the key  structural, thematic and contextual elements of a selection of English and 
translated detective fiction texts. 
2. Provide students with a historical overview of classic detective fiction beginning with Edgar 
Allan Poe, the earliest writer of detective fiction, to the most acclaimed writers of the twentieth 
century. 
3. Introduce students to literary techniques and devices, including the development of point of 
view, characterization, plot resolution, closure, setting, and dominant ideology, that authors 
of detective fiction use to foster the reader’s experience of mystery and suspense. 
4. Through a selection of short detective fictions help students investigate the spatio -temporal 
/cultural anxieties of the 20th century zeitgeist.  
Learning Outcomes: 
The students will be able to: 
1. Detect how detective fiction about crime, intrigue, and murder reflects the values, concerns, 
and tensions of the society to which the author belongs.  
2. Acquire knowledge of the more significant debates surrounding the context of crime, methods 
of surveillance, development of forensics, and administration of justice.  
3. Identify intersections between literary representations of crime, and broader cultural 
discourses, such as postcolonialism, feminism, racism and gothicism. 
4. Understand how women writers of detective fiction use its literary medium as a tool for shaping 
social attitudes and challenging gender roles.   
5. Examine the psychological implications of detective fiction on readers and thereby judge its 
literary merit.  
Contents: 
Introducing the genre: Looking at detective fiction as a body of literature, defining terms such as 
‘mystery’ and ‘suspense,’ history and evolution of detective fiction. (2 lectures) 
 Close Textual Readings and Conversations : Edgar Allan Poe (5 Lectures), Arthur Conan Doyle 
(5 Lectures), Agatha Christie (5 Lectures), Dorothy L. Sayers (5 Lectures),  Anna Katharine Green (5 
Lectures), G. K. Chesterton (5 Lectures), Satyajit Ray (5 Lectures), Saradindu Bandyopadhyay (5 
Lectures) 
Textbooks: 
1. The Complete Sherlock Holmes, Gramercy Books. 
2. The World's Greatest Detective Stories, Embassy Books. 
3. Miss Marple’s Final Cases, Agatha Christie, HarperCollins Publishers. 
4. The Innocence of Father Brown, G.K. Chesterton, Maple Press. 
5. The Mysterious Affair at Styles, Agatha Christie, Srishti Publishers. 
6. Rhythm of Riddles, Saradindu Bandyopadhyay, Puffin. 
7. The Adventures of Feluda: The Golden Fortress, Satyajit Ray, Puffin. 
8. The Dreadful Beauty, Sunil Gangopadhyay, Ponytale Books. 
 
References: 
1. Delamater, Jerome and Ruth Prigozy. Theory and Practice of Classic Detective Fiction. London: 
Greenwood Press, 1997. 
2. Matzke, Christine., and Susanne Muehleisen. (Eds.). Postcolonial Postmortems: Crime Fiction 
from a transcultural perspective. Amsterdam: Rodopi, 2006. 
3. Winks, Robin W. Detective Fiction: A Collection of Critical Essays. London: Prentice-Hall, 1980. 
4. Rzepka, Charles J. Detective Fiction. Cambridge: Polity Press, 2005. 
5. Singer, Marc., and Nels Pearson. Detective Fiction in a Postcolon ial and Transnational World. 
England: Ashgate, 2009. 
6. Chernaik, W. The Art of Detective Fiction. London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2000. 
7. Binyon, T.J. “Murder will out”: The detective in fiction . Oxford: OUP, 1989.Keating, H.R.F. 
Whodunit? A guide to crime, suspense and spy fiction. London: Windward, 1982. 
8. Ousby, Ian. Bloodhounds of Heaven: The Detective in English Fiction from Godwin to Doyle . 
Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1976. 
9. Rodell, Maria F. Mystery Fiction: Theory and Technique. London: Hammond, Hammond & Co., 
1954. 
38 
 
10. Scott, Sutherland. Blood in their Ink: The March of the Modern Mystery Novel. London: Stanley 
Paul & Co., 1953. 
11. Stewart, R.F. And always a detective: Chapters on the history of Detective fiction . Newton 
Abbot & North Pomfret: David and Charles, 1980.  
12. Symons, Julian. Bloody Murder: From the Detective Story to the Crime novel: A History . 
Harmondsworth, Viking, 1985. 
Online Resources:  
Prof. Andrew King. Introduction to Detective Fiction, Part 1 to 3. University of Greenwich. 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_AWsWYBY6Ec&t=124s. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
39 
 
HSS - II Sociology, History, Political Science 
 
Course Title Introduction to Sociology Course No. HS455 
Department HSS Structure (L-T-P-C) 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG Type Elective 
Pre-requisite None     
 Objectives 
1. To introduce basic sociological perspectives to understanding the world 
2. To help students examine their own social experiences from a scientifically inquisitive 
perspective 
3. To understand how one's social position within unequal societies allows for different kinds of 
expression of selfhood and varied life experience. 
  
Learning Outcomes 
1. Develop a holistic understanding of sociological perspectives 
2. Apply sociological concepts, terms, and theories to the processes of everyday life  
3. Identify historical contexts that have shaped (and continue to shape) social constructions of 
inequalities and social stratifications, such as race, ethnicity, gender, social status, economic 
class, and religion 
 
Contents 
Introduction: What is Sociology? Why study Sociology (5 lectures); Sociological Theories and 
Perspectives (5 lectures) 
Social Structures, Social Processes, and Social Institutions: Social Stratifications (Ethnicity, 
Race, Caste, Gender, Social Class) (6 lectures); Intimate Relations (Marriage and the Family); 
Social Institutions (Education; Religion; Economy); Social Inequalities (Poverty and Inequality); 
Social Processes (Migrations and other mobilities) (6 lectures) 
Community, Globalisation and Environment: Urban Sociology (5 lectures); Transnational 
Corporate Power, and the Environment (6 lectures) 
People, Places, and Technology: Science as a social process(4 lectures); Sociologies of Medicine 
and Healthcare; Technology, Networks, and Image representations (5 lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. Deshpande,S., Contemporary India: Sociological Perspectives, Viking, 2003 
2. Macionis,J. J., and Plummer K., Sociology: A Global Introduction, Prentice Hall, 2012 
3. Weber,M., Basic Concepts in Sociology, Citadel Press, 1993 
  
NPTEL Resources 
1. Introduction to Sociology, Sambit Mallick, IIT Guwahati,  
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/109103023/ 
2. Understanding Cultural Studies Part I, Liza Das, IIT Guwahati,  
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/109103019/ 
3. Indian So ciety: Issues and Problems, Sambit Mallick,  Liza Das, IIT Guwahati,  
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/109103022/ 
4. Science,     Technology,  and     Society,      Sambit       Mallick,       Archana    
Barua,       IIT      Guwahati, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/109103024/ 
5. Population and Society, A.K. Sharma, IIT Kanpur,  http://nptel.ac.in/courses/109104044/ 
  
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Title Digital Society Number HSL4XX0 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for UG and PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite None     
 Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce students to the dominant discourses that frame debates on digital society  
2. Familiarize students with the literature pertaining to web technologies and their cultural, legal and 
ethical formations and practices 
3. Familiarize students with the complex relationships between digital cultures and digital divides  
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Identify the ways in which digital media shape identity 
2. Utilize new opportunities for meaningful data collection from and using sophisticated forms of 
artificial intelligence 
3. Identify knowledge and truth amongst the abundance of information 
 
Contents 
Introduction to Digital Society: Digital components of a connected society (5 lectures) 
Theorizing Digital Society: New forms of power; Data as sociomaterial objects; Archives; Digital 
veillance (7 lectures) 
Digital Identities and Relationships: Self and the Digital Society; Embodied Identities i n Digital 
Society; Bias and Privilege – Digital Inequalities; Marginalised Histories; Cyborgs (7 lectures) 
Digital Spaces and Practices: Rethinking space and surveillance in digital societies; Gender, Space, 
and Place in Digital Societies ; Urban Informatics and Sociological Imagination -Smart cities; Digital 
Healthcare; Mobility in Digital Society; Digital Heritage (8 lectures) 
Network Society: The Internet as a Network; Networks and the Cultural Imaginary; Inequalities in 
the Network Society; Information Capital; Interface Design for Diverse Populations (8 lectures) 
Re-conceptualizing Research in a Digital Age: Information Management – Data Analysis 
Software; Large Digital Systems; Data protection and the politics of data privacy (7 lectures)  
  
Textbook 
1. Lupton,D., (2015), Digital Sociology, London, New York: Routledge 
2. Gere,C., (2008), Digital Culture, 2nd Edition, London: Reaktion Books Limited 
  
Reference Books 
1. Bentkowska-Kafel, A., Cashen, T., and Gardiner, H. (Eds.) (2009), Digital Visual Cultur e: Theory 
and Practice, Bristol and Chicago: Intellect Books 
2. Karaganis, J. (Ed.), (2007), Structures of Participation in Digital Culture , Social Science Research 
Council, Columbia University Press 
3. Tredinnick, L. (2008), Digital Information Culture: T he Individual and Society in the Digital Age , 
Oxford: Chandos Publishing Limited 
  
Online Resources 
1.  Digital    Humanities  Seminar     Video  Archive      of    the  Open      
 University,  UK, http://www.open.ac.uk/arts/research/digital-humanities/videos 
41 
 
 
Title Urban Sociology Number HSL 4xx0 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   
Objectives  
1. To help students understand the history of modern cities and how urban life today came to be 
the way it is 
2. Critically analyse proliferation of urban spaces and understand how these spaces can be biggest 
asset to humanity, as well as its biggest threat 
3. Study Urban inequality  
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
       1.  Understand urban life and its socio-historical genealogies 
       2. Critically analyse urban spaces and inequality in those spaces     
       3.  Think of urban problems and solutions to the have a better urban life 
  
Contents 
      1. Sociological perspectives on the city – Globalisation and the city, Urban planning and desing 
and politics of it, Urban Lives, Urban Violence - 12 
      2. Geography, Space and Identity – Neighborhoods and social networks, Space and Identity, 
Aesthetics and Archtechture - 10 
      3. Landscapes of Urban Life – Technology and the city, Formations and Transformation of space, 
Urban Networks, Mobility and speed - 9  
     4. The Underlife of cities – Underclass in the city, Distress migration and quality of life, Urban 
Street Cultures - 11 
 
Text Books: A handbook with all the study material will be given to the students.  
  
Reference Books: 
 1. Sassen, S. 2000. Cities in a World Economy. Thousand Oaks:Sage 
 2.  Hannerz, U. 1993. “The Culture Role of World Cities” in Cohen, Anthony P. and Fukui, 
Katsuyoshi (eds.) Humanizing the City: Social Contexts of Urban Life at the Turn of the 
Millennium. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. 
 3. Mort, F. 1996. Cultures of Consumption: Masculinities and Social Space in Late 
Twentieth-Century Britain. (Part III: Topographies of Taste, Place, Space and Identity), 
London and New York: Routledge 
 4. Holston, J. 1989. The Modernist City: An Anthropological Critique of Brasilia. Chicago: 
The University of Chicago Press.  
 5. Bourdieu, P. 2000. The Weight of the World: Social Suffering in Contemporary Society. 
Translated Priscilla Panrkhurst Ferguson, Stanford: Stanford University Press.  
 6. Hertel, B. and Cynthia, A. H. (eds.). 1986. Living Banaras: Hindu religion in cultural 
context. New York: Suny Press.  
 7. Macdonald, N. Graffiti Subculture: Youth, Masculinity and Identity in London and New York 
 
Online Course Material 
1. https://gian.iitkgp.ac.in/files/brochures/BR1449508690GIAN_brochure_Youth.pdf  
2. 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mJ8Pr5gIVCg&list=PLuRWUSe2BunHb_nXNK_o1OY__7HzD8g -J 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
42 
 
Title Indian Society: A Sociological Introduction Number HSL3070 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG Type Elective 
Prerequisite None     
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce students to critically think about colonialism, democracy, nation building and 
globalization in shaping contemporary society in India. 
2.  Help the students to explore the dynamic relationship between the process of social change 
in India and make the students familiarize with important and changing parameters of 
Indian society which defines Indian social structures. 
3.  Help the students to conceptualize the key concepts, which defines and dominates Indian 
social structures, through caste, class, religion, culture, kinship, agrarian social structures 
and politics, and understand how these shapes individual’s  positions and interactions in 
society. 
 Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Comprehend social changes as a continued social process, which shapes Indian social 
structures. 
2. Find inter -linkages between Indian social str uctures/cultures and how it impacts the 
communities and society at large.     
3.  Develop sensitivity towards an inclusive Indian society. 
 Contents 
Introduction to Indian Society: Approaches to the study of India Society, Unity in Diversity, The 
Ideas of India (5 lectures) 
Indian Social Institutions: Forms of Marriage, Family and Kinship (5 lectures) 
Indian Economy: Agrarian structure and relations, Occupational structure, Features of Tribal 
Economy, Urban Economy, Industrial, Service and Informal Sectors (5 lectures) 
Indian Stratification Varna and Jati:  Caste and Class in India, Agrarian and Non Agrarian 
classes, Emergence of middle class, Gender and Middle class in Neo -Liberal India (5 
lectures) 
Indian Polity System of governance:  Nation, State and Local  Governance, Access to politics 
through Caste, Religion, Language and Region (5 lectures) 
Indian Education: Traditional Educational System, Modern formal education system in India - 
Education and Social Mobility (5 lectures) 
Communities: Tribal Community, Rural community, Urban Community (5 lectures) 
Problems of Indian Society: Land alienation and displacement, Problems of Health and Nutrition, 
Indebtedness and Farmers’ suicides (5 lectures) 
 Reference Books 
1. Uberoi, P., (ed.) (1994), Family, Kinship and Marriages in India, Oxford University Press. 
2. Achin, V., (1997), Communalism Contested-Religion, Modernity and Secularization , Vistaar 
Publications. 
3. Khilnani, S., (1997), The Idea of India, Penguin Books. 
4. Guha, R., (1998), A Subaltern Studies Reader, Oxford University Press. 
5. Stuart, C. and Harris, J., (2000), Reinventing India, Polity Press. 
6. Srinivas, M.N., (2002), Collected Essays, Oxford University Press. 
7. Deshpande, S., (2003), Contemporary India: Sociological Perspectives, Penguin India. 
8. Patel, S., (ed.) (2011). Doing Sociology in India: Genealogies, Locations and Practices , 
Oxford University Press. 
9. Jodhka, S.S., (2012). Village India, Orient Blackswan. 
10. Jodhka, S.S., (2012). Caste. Oxford India Short Introductions, Oxford University Press. 
11. Shah, A.M., (2014). The Writings of A.M.Shah: The Household and Family in India , Orient 
BlackSwan. 
12. Baviska, A. and Ray, R., (2015). Elite and Everyman: The Cultural Politics of the Indian 
Middle Classes, Routledge. 
  Online Course Material 
43 
 
1. Mallick, S., and Das, L., Indian Society: Issues and Problems. Department of Humanities & 
Social Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology, Guwahati 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/109/103/109103022/ 
 
 
  
44 
 
Title Youth Studies Number HSL 4xx0 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG Type Elective 
Prerequisite None     
Objectives 
1.     To produce a diversity of thought, imagination and action in students by introducing them 
to how young people have been influencing human existence now and through ages 
2.     To help students understand the society through the framework of youth cultures and 
youth experience 
3.     To help students imagine a collective, fair furture through contemporary social theory  
 Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Understand their experience as a socio-cultural, gendered phenomenon 
2. Develop a holistic imagination of the society through a theoretically sound framework  
3.  Know and understand historically the influence of youth on politics, culture and everyday life 
  
Contents 
1. Introduction to Youth studies – Objectives, Outcomes and Examples - 6 lectures 
2. Cultures, subcultures -  Youth subcultures around the world, Identity and youth, What it 
means to be young in India – youth subcultures and experiences, Youth, work and labour, Social 
Deviance and youth - 10 lectures 
3. Youth and Social movements - Political, cultural and ecological movements driven by the 
young historically and at present. - 8 lectures  
4. Youth and Technology - Social media and youth experience, New careers and how technology 
is influenced and influences the youth, Material apparatus of being young - 10 lectures 
5. Gender and Youth – Youth as a gendered experience, relationships - 6 lectures 
Text Books :A handbook with all the study material will be given to the students. 
 Reference Books: 
 1. White & Wyn, Rethinking Youth. Allen & Unwin, New York. 1997. 
 2.  Footwhyte, W. Street Corner Society. University of California Press, Berkeley, 2001. 
 3. Ginwritght, Noguera et. al Beyond Resistance! Youth Activism and Community Change. 
Routlege, Bew York, 2006. 
 4. Jeffrey, C. Timepass: Youth, Class and Politics of Waiting in India. Stanford University Press, 
CT. 2006 
 5. Willis, P. Learning to Labour: How working cla ss kids get working class jobs. Routlege, 
London. 2001 
 6. Tribhuvan, P. The Social Life of Cannabis in the Himalayas. Forthcoming. 
 7. Macdonald, N. Graffiti Subculture: Youth, Masculinity and Identity in London and New York 
  
Online Course Material 
1. https://gian.iitkgp.ac.in/files/brochures/BR1449508690GIAN_brochure_Youth.pdf  
2. 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mJ8Pr5gIVCg&list=PLuRWUSe2BunHb_nXNK_o1OY__7Hz
D8g-J 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
 
Title Law and Society Number HSL 4xx0 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives  
1. To help students understand history of law and jurisprudence 
2. To help students understand how law works, and what is illegality 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
     1.  Know what sociology of law means and understand the place of law in society  
     2.  Ability to critically analyse current events from the perspective of sociology of law  
     3.  Understand the workings of law framework in India 
  
Contents 
     1. Introduction to Jurisprudence – Legal positivism and Natural Law theory, Philosophies of 
Law/ Justice, Critical Legal studies, Feminist Jurisprudence 
     2. Anrthropological perspectives on Law – Legal Evolutionism, Relativism a nd Law, Legal 
Pluralism 
     3. The Political Economy of Law – Law and Ideology, Law and Power, Property and Law, 
Courts as Social Institutions  
     4. Law and Society in India – Historical Processes, Contemporary Concerns, India 
Constitution in Practise, Critical analysis of some judgments 
       
 
Text Books : 
 
1) Sarat, A. 2004. The Blackwell Companion to Law and Society. Oxford: Blackwells. 
(selected chapters). 
  
Reference Books: 
1. Freeman. M.D.A. (ed.). 2001 Lloyd's Introduction to Jurisprudence. 7th ed. London: 
Sweet and Maxwell. (Chapters 2,3,6,13,14, with selected extracts). 
2. Kapur, Ratna (ed.). 1996. Feminist Terrains in Legal Domains. New Delhi: Kali for 
Women. (Chapter 4). 
3. Cotterrell, R. (ed.). 2001. Sociological Perspectives on Law. Aldershot: Ashgate. (Vol. I 
& II, selected chapters). 
4. Scheppele, K.L. 1994. Legal Theory and Social Theory, Annual Review of Sociology 20: 
383-4065. 
5. Moore, S.F. 2001. Certainties Undone: Fifty Turbulent Years of Legal Anthropology, 
1949-1999, Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute (NS), 7: 95-116. 
6. Newman, K. 1983. Law and Economic Organisation. Cambridge: CUP, (Chapters 1-2).  
 
Online Course Material 
1. https://gian.iitkgp.ac.in/files/brochures/BR1449508690GIAN_brochure_Youth.pdf  
2. 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mJ8Pr5gIVCg&list=PLuRWUSe2BunHb_nXNK_o1O
Y__7HzD8g-J 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Title Sociology of Work and 
Industry 
Number HSL 4xx0 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives  
1. To help students understand history of work and industry 
2. To help students understand inequality in work and labour crisis 
3. To deliberate on the future of work 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
     1.  Understand genealogies of work and industry 
     2.  Ability to critically analyze work structures    
     3.  Think about future and nature of work 
  
Contents 
     1. Industrialisation – history and concepts, industrialism and post-industrial society 
     2. Employee organization, blue collar, white collar, Managers 
     3. Industrial Conflict and Resolution – Industrial conflict, collective bargaining,     
Participation, self management and co-operation 
     4. Organization of Work – Machine Tending, Assembly Line and Process Industry, Job 
redesign and enrichment, New Technologies, Emerging Forms of work and future of trade unions 
       
 
Text Books :A handbook with all the study material will be given to the students. 
  
Reference Books: 
 
1. Kerr, C. et. al. 1973. Industrialism and Industrial Man, Harmondsworth: Penguin. 
2. Kumar, K. 1973. Prophecy and Progress, London: Allen Lane. 
3. Macarthy, E. A. J. 1973. (ed.), Trade Unions, Harmondsworth: Penguin. 
4. Poole, M. 1982 Theories of Trade Unionism: A Sociology for Industrial Relations, 
London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. 
5. Hyman, R. and Robert, P. (eds.). 1985. The New Working Class: White Collar Workers 
and their Organizations, London: MacMillan. 
6. Hyman, R. 1975. Industrial Relations: A Marxist Introduction, London: MacMillan  
7. Forester, T. 2010. The Information Technology Revolution, Oxford: Basil Blackwell. 
8. Knight, D. et. al. 2001. Job Redesign, Hants: Gower 
9. Costes, K. and T. Topham.2005. The New Unionism, Harmondsworth: Penguin 
Online Course Material 
1. https://gian.iitkgp.ac.in/files/brochures/BR1449508690GIAN_brochure_Youth.pdf 
2. 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mJ8Pr5gIVCg&list=PLuRWUSe2BunHb_nXNK_o1O
Y__7HzD8g-J 
  
47 
 
Title  Development and Environment  Number  HSL3060 
Department  HSS L-T-P [C]  3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  UG Type  Elective 
Prerequisite  None   
Objectives   
The instructor will:  
    1. Provide a critical understanding of the way development discourse is conceptualized and 
contested in social sciences literature.  
2. Introduce students to the debates on development and environment and help them better 
understand the contemporary issues in the field of environmental paradigms.  
3. Facilitate students to understand different perspectives on development policy and 
environmental governance, especially in the socio-historical and political context of India.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to:  
1. Interpret the theories and concepts underlying the principles and practices of environment, 
sustainable development and natural resource management.  
2. Develop the capacity to participate in debates on dev elopment and environmental discourses 
and governance.  
3. By the end of the course, students will be able to understand the development 
and environmental policies and prepare them for further research in these areas.  
 
Contents  
Historical Location of the Idea of Development: Perspective from the Third World (2 lectures) 
Dominant Development Paradigm and its critique (6 lectures)  
Theories and Actors in Development Politics: State, Civil society, Market Forces, International, 
National and Local Levels (6 lectures)  
History of development in India across space and time: experiences, policies, achievements, 
and development projects, development -induced displacement in Indian context (6 lectures) 
Environmental historical discourse of India across space and time (3 lectures) Environmental 
Paradigms: Theoretical and Empirical Perspectives from India and Global South (6 lectures)  
Gender and Environment: Feminist political ecology, environmental movements and 
case  studies from global South (4 lectures)  
Natural Resource Management and Role of Local Communities: use, access, management, 
and  technology issues, recent conflict over natural resources (6 lectures)  
Sustainable Development and Environment Research: challenge of sustainable 
development,  and a way forward (3 lectures)  
 
 
Textbook:  
A handbook with all the study material will be given to the students.   
Reference Books  
1. McMichael, P. (2016) Development and social change: a global perspective, London: Sage. 
2. Webster, A. (1984) Introduction to the sociology of development , Macmillan. 3. Dube, S. 
C. (1988) Modernisation and development: search for alternative paradigms . New Delhi: 
Vistaar Publications.  
4.Guha, R. (2000), Environmentalism: a global history. Delhi: Oxford University Press. 5.Gadgil, 
M. and G, Ramachandra. (2014) This fissured land: an ecological history of India,   New Delhi: 
OUP.  
 
Online Course Material   
1. https://www.coursera.org/learn/sustainable-development#about 
 
 
 
 
48 
 
Title Social Stratification Number HSL 4xx0 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. To examine hierarchical differentiation that characterize human society 
2. To analyse ideological and practical explanations offered to justify social inequalities  
3. To identify the intersectionality that create and sustain social inequalities 
 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
     1.  Develop sensitivity to social inequality  
     2.  Develop reflexivity and understand privilege 
     3.  Address issues of social inequality while designing technical solutions   
 
Contents 
     1. Introduction: Concept and Theories  – Introduce the concept of social stratification and 
most significant theories around the concept (7 lectures) 
    2. Forms of Stratification: Class  -  Theories and empirical studies on class analysis and 
transformation of class structures (10 lectures) 
    3. Forms of Stratification: Caste – Theories on caste, Empirical studies with a focus on 
contemporary India. Caste in Labour markets. Export of caste (9 lectures) 
  4. Stratification and Gender: Gender inequalities, labour market and inequalities, 
intersectionality of Gender with class, caste and race (8 lectures) 
    5. Race, Ethnicity and stratification – Race and social inequality, Race and colonization (8 
lectures)  
     
Text Books: A handbook with all the study material will be given to the students. 
  
Reference Books: 
 
1.  Gupta, D. ed. 1991. Social Stratification. Delhi: Oxford University Press. 
2. Tumin, M. M. 1953. Some Principles of Stratification: A Critical Analysis. American Sociological 
Review, 18 (4): 387-94 
3. Jodhka, S. S. 2012. Caste. Oxford India Short Introductions. Delhi: Oxford University Press 
4. Acker, J. 1998. Women and Social Stratification: A Case of Intellectual Sexism, in Feminist  
Foundations: Towards Transforming Sociology, Kristen et. al. (ed.) Delhi: Sage. 
5. Xaxa, V. 2003. ‘Tribes in India’ in Veena Das ed. Oxford India Companion to Sociology and 
Social Anthropology, 1: 373- 408. Delhi: Oxford University Press. 
 
Online Course Material 
1. https://www.coursera.org/lecture/classical-sociological-theory/2-6-social-stratification-
neOzU 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
49 
 
HSS - III Economics, Public Health 
 
Title Microeconomics-1 Number AIL4010 
Department AIDE (CMCE) L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech. Type Core for minor, Elective for all others 
Prerequisite None     
  
Objectives 
1. Introduce the fundamental principles of individual decision-making. 
2. Formalize the decision-making behavior for consumers as well as producers. 
3. Set up the general equilibrium model and price determination. 
  
Learning Outcomes: 
1. Understanding of axiomatic approach of economic decision-making. 
2. Modeling economic decision -making in a tractable form and analyze the comparative -
statics. 
3. Understanding of basic market mechanisms and fundamentals behind price 
determination. 
  
Course Content: 
Preferences: axiomatic approach and examples. (4 lectures) 
Utility theory: representation theorem and examples. (4 lectures) 
Cardinal vs ordinal approaches. (3 lectures) 
Utility maximisation problem. (4 lectures) 
Demand analysis. (3 lectures) 
Expenditure minimisation problem as dual and Hicksian demand. (3 lectures) 
Integrability and recoverability (2 lectures) 
Weak axiom of revealed preference (3 lectures) 
Producer theory: profit maximisation and cost minimisation. (3 lectures) 
Welfare theorems (3 lectures)  
Market structures: Perfectly competitive market , Monopoly and discrimination (4 lectures) 
Strategic aspects in market structure: oligopoly (3 lectures) 
General equilibrium. (4 lectures) 
  
Reference Books: 
1. A Short Course in Intermediate Microeconomics with Calculus. Feldman, A. & Serrano, 
R. ,  CUP, 2018. 
2. Microeconomic theory. Mas-colell, A., Whinston, M.D., Green, J. R., Oxford University 
Press, 1995. 
3. A Course in Microeconomic Theory. David M. Kreps, Princeton University Press, 1990. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
50 
 
Title Microeconomics-2 Number AIL4XX0 
Department/School AIDE (CMCE) L-T-P 
[C] 
3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech (All Branches), 
P.G., Ph.D. 
Type Core for minor, Elective for 
others 
Prerequisite Microeconomics-1 
Objectives 
1. To introduce strategic interactions among the  rational economic agents in the 
general equilibrium framework 
2. To equip students with concepts from market design such as auction theory.   
3. To provide a thorough analysis of general  equilibrium theory.   
  
Learning Outcomes 
1. In depth understanding of strategic interactions in  various economic models. 
2. Understanding of dual economic decision -making  of rational agents in a general 
equilibrium setting.  
  
Course Content 
Game theory:  normal form games, common knowledge  assumption, strategies, Nash 
equilibrium, simultaneous  move games and examples, games of perfect  information, games 
of imperfect information. (5 lectures) 
Information economics:  adverse selection and moral  hazard problems, examples, 
information and market  performance.  (12 lectures) 
Auctions and mechanism design problems. (13 lectures)  
General equilibrium theory: Debreu’s axiomatic  approach to characterize equilibrium in 
competitive  market - existence, uniqueness and stability; core and  equilibria.  (1 2 
lectures) 
  
Reference Books:   
1. Microeconomic theory, Mas-colell, A., Whinston,  M.D., Green, J. R., OUP, 1995.   
2. Theory of value: an axiomatic analysis of economic  equilibrium, Debreu, G., Cowles 
Foundation, 1977.  
3. Game theory, Fudenberg, D., Tirole, J., MIT Press,  1991.  
4. Advanced microeconomic theory, Jehle, G.A.,  Reny, P.J., Pearson, latest edition.  
  
Online Course Material: 
1.  https://online.stanford.edu/courses/soe-ycs0004-game-theory-ii-advanced-applications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
51 
 
Title Health Economics  Number HSL4070 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0[3] 
Offered for UG Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   
 
Objective 
1. To be able to evaluate the health sector in India using economic tools. 
2. To have a global perspective and a broad understanding of institutional changes currently in 
the Indian healthcare system. 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Understand microeconomic concepts and their application for the health sector.  
2. Understand the role of economic incentives, competition and regulation on the functioning of 
the health care system. 
3. Understand the health care insurance sector and financing of health care. 
4. Understand how different healthcare systems function around the world.  
 
 
Contents 
Introduction to health economics: An introduction to health, health care, health system and 
health economics (5 lectures). 
Microeconomic and statistical concepts : Demand, supply, elasticity, production, market 
structures, economic efficiency & cost-benefit analysis, economic evaluation, and valuation of 
human life, regression analysis, statistical inference (12 lectures). 
Supply and Demand for health : Health production function and cost of health care, health 
demand, human capital model and the determinants of demand for healt h, demand for and 
supply of health insurance, uncertainty, adverse selection and moral hazard in the health 
insurance market (10 lectures).  
Healthcare Industry: Market Structure of health care industry, types and characteristics of 
various health care providers, India’s healthcare system (5 lectures). 
Government and Health care systems : Healthcare financing, rationale for government 
intervention in health care market and the nature of intervention by government in health care 
sector, Comparison of healthcare systems in different countries, Universal Health Coverage in 
India (10 lectures).  
 
Reference Books 
1. Introduction to health economics. Guinness, & Wiseman. McGraw-Hill Education (UK), 2011. 
2. McPake, B., Normand, C., Smith, S., & Nolan, A. (2020). Health economics: an international 
perspective. Routledge. 
3. The Economics of Health and Health Care, Sherman Folland, Pearson, 7/e, 2012 
4. Health Economics for Developing Countries: A Practical Guide , Witter S, T Ensor, M 
Jowett, and R Thompson, McMillan Education Ltd, 2000 
 
Electronic Resource 
http://www.healtheconomics.com/resources/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
52 
 
Title Industrial Organisation Number HSL7XX0 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG and PhD Type Elective  
Prerequisite None    
 
Objectives  
1. To familiarise students with fundamental concepts used for economic analysis of firm 
behavior.  
2. To equip the students with knowledge of benchmark models and strategic interactions.  
3. To introduce students to varied applications of theoretical models.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. A detailed understanding of various market structures and their implications for firms and 
consumers.  
2. Ability to formally analyze firm behavior from an economic and strategic perspective.  
3. Knowledge and understanding of important models and observable applications.  
  
Contents  
1. Introduction to concepts for economic analysis: what is industrial organisation , overview of 
theoretical and empirical perspectives, law of diminishing marginal returns, demand function, 
cost function, profit maximization. (7 lectures) 
2. Market structures and strategic techniques:  perfect competition, monopolistic competition 
and monopoly, market power, efficiency and public policy, firms as strategic agents and Nash 
equilibrium. (7 lectures) 
3. Price discrimination: perfect price discrimination, multi-market price discrimination, arbitrage 
and screening, non-linear pricing. (6 lectures) 
4. Static and Dynamic competition: Bertrand paradox and capacity constraints, Cournot model, 
concentration indices, static approach to dynamic pricing, repeated interaction and collusion, 
price rigidities and excess capacity. (7 lectures) 
5. Non-price competition : advertising, market power, information, R&D and innovation. (3 
lectures) 
6. Product differentiation: spatial competition models, advertising and information, vertical 
differentiation. (5 lectures) 
7. Entry, accomodation and exit: natural monopoly and barriers to entry, stackelberg 
competition and applied strategies for deterrence. (5 lectures) 
8. Network effects, auctions, strategic policy commitment and international trade. (2 lectures)  
Textbooks 
1. Jeffrey Church and Roger Ware (2000), Industrial Organization: A S trategic Approach, 
McGraw Hill. 
2. Jean Tirole (1998). The Theory of Industrial Organization, MIT Press. 
3. Luis Cabral (2000) Industrial Organization: An Introduction, MIT Press. 
4. Lynne Pepall, Dan Richards and George Norman (2014). Contemporary Theory and Empirical 
Applications, Wiley.  
5. Xavier Vives (1999). Oligopoly Pricing: Old Ideas and New Tools , MIT Press. 
 
Reference books: 
1. Anindya Sen (1996). Industrial organization,  Oxford University Press. 
2. Richard Schmalensee and R. Willig (1989). Handbook of Industrial Organization , vol. 1-2, 1 
ed., Elsevier. 
3. Mark Armstrong and Robert Porter (2007). Handbook of Industrial Organization, vol. 3, 1 ed., 
Elsevier. 
 
Research papers 
1. Spence, A., (1976), Product Differentiation and Welfare , American Economic Review , 66, 
issue 2, p. 407-14. 
2. Dixit, Avinash, (1986), Comparative Statics for Oligopoly, International Economic Review, 27, 
issue 1, p. 107-22. 
3. Maskin, Eric and Riley, John, (1984), Monopoly with Incomplete Information , RAND Journal 
of Economics, 15, issue 2, p. 171-196. 
4. d'Aspremont, Claude, Gabszewicz, Jean and Thisse, Jacques, (1979), On Hotelling's "Stability 
in Competition", Econometrica, 47, issue 5, p. 1145-50. 
53 
 
5. Milgrom, Paul a nd Roberts, John, (1982), Limit Pricing and Entry under Incomplete 
Information: An Equilibrium Analysis, Econometrica, 50, issue 2, p. 443-59. 
6. Rochet, Jean and Tirole, Jean, (2003), Platform Competition in Two -Sided Markets, No 152, 
IDEI Working Papers, Institut d'Économie Industrielle (IDEI), Toulouse. 
Online resources: 
1. Industrial Organisation 1, MIT Open Courseware,  
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/economics/14-271-industrial-organization-i-fall-
2005/index.htm 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
54 
 
Title Health and Development Number HSL4XX0 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives  
1. To understand the relation between economic development and health status across the world 
in the modern period.  
2. To understand the social and environment determinants of health and their relationship to 
economic policy. 
3. To introduce equity  as a dimension of progress towards universal health care and the 
sustainable development goals. 
4. To understand the impact of globalization on the wellbeing of the world.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Understand the impact of economic development on the wellbeing of the world. 
2. Appreciate economic growth and origins of inequality. 
3. Conceptually understand the inequalities in health and role of social determinants.  
 
Contents 
Introduction to basic concepts of health and development: Health, illness and diseases, medicine, 
birth rate, death rate, life expectancy, mortality, morbidity, communicable and non -communicable 
diseases, gross domestic product, gross national income, huma n development, political economy of 
health and development (10 lectures).  
Wellbeing of the world:  Different measures of wellbeing, health status in the modern world, life -
expectancy, happiness index, and human development (7 lectures). 
Inequalities in hea lth, and social determinants of health:  Social determinants of health; The Rio 
Declaration on Social determinants of health, health disparities, unequal access and utilisation of 
health services, trends in global poverty and income inequality (7 lectures).  
Impact of globalization on health:   Five ways in which globalization affects health care -, structural 
adjustment programme and health, global institutions, impacts on environment, nature of work, 
financialization: neoliberalism and healthcare (7 lectures). 
Health, Development and Challenges in India:  Understanding the current inter -linkages between 
health and development; poverty, health and development in India; main challenges in achieving the 
health-SDGs in India; widening inequalities in health status  of population, low investment in public 
health services, shortages of human resources and medicines (10 lectures). 
Text Books : 
1. WHO. (2008). Closing the gap in a generation: health equity through action on the social 
determinants of health - Final report of the commission on social determinants of health.         
2. Deaton, A. (2013). The great escape: health, wealth, and the origins of inequality. Princeton 
University Press. 
3. Marmot, M. (2015). The health gap: the challenge of an unequal world. Bloomsbury Publishing 
USA. 
Reference Books/Reports: 
1. World Health Organization. (2001). Macroeconomics and health: investing in health for 
economic development. 
2. Birn, A. E., Pillay, Y., & Holtz, T. H. (2017). Textbook of global health. Oxford University Press. 
3. Balabanova, D., McKee, M., & Mills, A. (2011).  Good health at low cost’25 years on what 
makes a successful health system?. 
4. Johnson, S. A. (2017). Challenges in health and development: from global to community 
perspectives. Springer. 
Online Course Material 
https://www.coursera.org/learn/social-determinants-of-health 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
55 
 
Title Indian Economic Development 
and Policy 
Number HS7XX 
Department HSS Structure (L-T-P-C) 3-0-0 
Offered for UG and PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   
Objectives: 
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce students to current and evolving policy debates in the backdrop of issues pertaining to 
economic development of India. 
2. Familiarize students with economic development issues and policy aspects which are important 
in professions involving nation -building broadly and policy formulation and implementation 
specifically. 
 
Learning Outcomes: 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Equipped with understanding of issues in Indian economic development and ensuing evolution of 
policy debates. 
2. Able to have a broad perspective of the multifaceted nature of economic development issues and 
incorporate this in their professional pursuits. 
 
Contents: 
Brief overview of economic growth and development policies in India since Independence  
Agriculture: Policies and Performance; Growth; productivity; agrarian structure and technology; 
capital formation; trade; pricing and procurement. 
Industry: Policies and performance; production trends; small scale industries; public sector; foreign 
investment, labour regulation 
Services: Policies and performance, trends, patterns, composition, drivers 
Employment : Occupational structure in the organised and unorganised sectors; open-, under- and 
disguised- unemployment (rural and urban); employment schemes and their impact 
Growth and Distribution: Trends in poverty, inequality and unemployment, Policies for eradicat ing 
poverty and generating employment 
Population and Economic Development: Demographic trends and issues, Education, Health and 
Malnutrition 
International Trade: Performance and Policies, trends and patterns of imports and exports, FDI, FII 
Selected Readings (will be revised periodically, given the dynamic nature of the course 
contents): 
1. P. Agrawal (ed.) (2018). Sustaining High Growth in India. Cambridge University Press 
2. U. Kapila (2015). India Economy Since Independence. Academic Foundation  
3. Krueger, A. O. (Ed.) (2002). Economic policy reforms and the Indian economy . University of 
Chicago Press. 
4. Banerjee, A. V., & Duflo, E. (2011). Poor economics: A radical rethinking of the way to fight global 
poverty.  
5. Basu, K., & Maertens, A. (2012 ). The New Oxford Companion to Economics in India . Oxford 
University Press.  
6. Jean Dreze and Amartya Sen( 2013). India: An Uncertain Glory. Allen Lane 
7. K. James (2008). Glorifying Malthus: Current Debate on Demographic Dividend in 
India.  Economic and Political Weekly 
8. Overview, 2014 in Republic of India, Accelerating Agriculture Productivity Growth, World Bank 
Group  
9. Chandrasekhar Rao and Mahendra Dev (2010). Agricultural Price Policy, Farm Profitability and 
Food Security. Economic & Political Weekly 
10. Chakraborty, J., & Nagaraj, R. (2020). Has India Deindustrialised Prematurely? Economic & 
Political Weekly 
11. Bhagwati and Panagariya (2012). A Multitude of Labour Laws and their Reforms in India's Tryst 
with Destiny. Collins Business 
12. S. Mehrotra (2015).  Realising the Demographic Dividend, Policies  to achieve Inclusive Growth 
in India, Cambridge University Press  
13. J.J. Thomas (2012). India’s Labour Market during the 2000s: Surveying the Changes. Economic 
& Political Weekly 
14. Biswajit Dhar (2015). India's New Foreign Trade Policy. Economic & Political Weekly 
 
56 
 
Title Political and Institutional 
Economics of Development 
Number HSL7460 
Department HSS Structure L-T-P (C) 3-0-0 (3) 
Offered for UG and PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives: 
The Instructor will: 
As the economy is embedded in society, economic interactions and decisions are shaped and 
constrained by its framework of institutions, be it the state, individuals, formal laws or social norms. 
Economic development therefo re, is inevitably and intricately linked with, and determined by 
political economy, social norms and institutions. It is this idea that this course explores.  
 
Learning Outcomes: 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
-Appreciate the importance of institutions, politics and society in economic growth and development 
-Appreciate the importance of the impact of intricately -related institutional and political aspects on 
individual decisions and actions, society and the economy. 
  
Contents: 
Institutions: Essence of Institutional Economics, Role of Institutions in Growth and Development, 
Varieties of Capitalism, Institutional Political Economy 
State, Law and Economy:  Economic Role of Political Institutions, State Actors, Issues in Law and 
Economics 
Social Norms, Beliefs, Culture and Preferences:  Role of social norms in individual preferences and 
economic outcomes, Role of Beliefs in Decision-making, Culture and Development 
Issues in Political Economy: Economics of Bureaucracy, Corruption, Media, Elections, Policies, 2008 
Crisis, Bankruptcy Law 
Conflict: Economic Causes and Consequences of Democracy, Violence, Cooperation, War  
Selected Readings (will be revised periodically): 
1.Acemoglu, D., Johnson, S., & Robinson, J. A. (2005). Institutions as a Fundamental Cause of 
Long-run Growth. Handbook of Economic Growth. Elsevier 
 
2.Chang, H. J. (2011). Institutions and economic development: theory, policy and history. Journal 
of institutional economics 
 
3.Engerman and Sokoloff (2000). History Lessons: Institutions, Factors Endowments, and Paths of 
Development in the New World. Journal of Economic Perspectives 
 
4.Weingast, B. R. (1995). The Economic Role of Political Institutions: Market-preserving Federalism 
and Economic Development. Journal of Law, Economics, & Organization 
 
5.Basu, K. (2020). The Republic of Beliefs: A New Approach to Law and Economics. Princeton 
University Press 
 
6.Basu,(2000). Prelude to Political Economy. Oxford University Press 
 
7.Rogers, M. (2021). Spending to Win: Political Institutions, Economic Geography, and Government 
Subsidies. Cambridge University Press 
 
8.Varoufakis, Y., Halevi, J., & Theocarakis, N. (2012). Modern Political Economics: Making Sense of 
the Post-2008 World. Routledge 
 
9.Gangopadhyay, S., & Santhakumar, V. (Eds.). (2013). Law and Economics: Volume I: Theory, 
Volume II: Practice. SAGE Publications India. 
 
10.Bardhan, P. (2004). Scarcity, Conflicts, and Cooperation: Essays in the Political and Institutional 
Economics of Development”. MIT Press. 
 
11.Bardhan, P. (2015). Reflections on Indian Political Economy. Economic and Political Weekly 
 
57 
 
Title Foundations of Finance Number HSL4XX0 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG Type  
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives 
1. The course will help students to acquire breadth of knowledge of the various segments in 
financial markets. 
2. Introduce the functioning of Banking and financial market structure 
3. This course aims at providing the students the intricacies of Indian financial system for better 
financial decision making. 
4. This course will address many critical personal financial management topics in order to help 
students to learn prudent habits both while in college and throughout lifetime. Through this 
course, the stu dents will cover a variety of personal finance topics, including budgets, 
investing, and managing risk. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
 
1. Students will develop an in depth understanding of the linkages and the interconnected nature 
of the global currency, bond, commodity and equity markets. 
2. Students will understand the importance of Indian financial system in the economic 
development of the country as it encourages both savings and investment 
3. This course will teach students on how to master their money, how to gr ow income, reduce 
debt, budget the smart way, invest money, and manage taxes and not avoiding them. 
 
Contents  
 
Module 1: Basics of Money, Banking and Financial Markets: An overview of the Financial System, 
Money; Understanding Interest rates and its behav ior, Central Banks and the Federal Reserve 
System, Money Supply Process, The stock market, The theory of rational expectations, and the 
efficient market hypothesis, An economic analysis of the financial structure and regulation, Financial 
Crises in advanced economies, Financial Crises in emerging economies, Banking and Management 
of Financial Institutions, Basics of Indian Financial System, Trends and Progress on Banking, RBI, 
SEBI and NSE India Annual Reports, Discussion on World Development Report and IMF  report (16 
lectures) 
Module 2: How Finance Works: Financial Analysis, Financial Perspective, Source of value creation, 
The art and science of valuation, Capital allocation (16 lectures) 
Module 3: Personal Finance Basics: Personal Finance, Saving Money for the future, Managing Debt, 
Fundamentals of Investing, Risk management in personal finance, Personal Tax Management (10 
lectures) 
 
Textbook 
 
1. Mishkin, F.S. 2019. The economics of Money, Banking and Financial Markets. 10th edition. 
Pearson India. 
 
Other Reference Books 
1. Machiraju, ‘Indian Financial System’ – Vikas Publishing House, 2nd Edition, 2002.  
2. Varshney P.N., & Mittal D.K., ‘Indian Financial System’, Sultan Chand & Sons, New Delhi. 
2002. 
Online Resources 
 
1. Prof. Abhijeet Chandra, Behavioral and Pe rsonal Finance, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/110/105/110105144/ 
 
2. Prof. Jitendra Mahakud, Introduction to Financial System, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/110/105/110105121/ 
 
 
 
58 
 
Title Individual and strategic decision 
making: theory and applications 
Number AIL4XX0 
Department AIDE (CMCE) L-T-P [C] 2-0-0 [2] 
Offered for UG and PhD Type Core for minor, Elective for 
others 
Prerequisite None     
Exclusions Introduction to game theory 
MAL4310 
    
  
Objectives 
1. Introduce students to the fundamentals of game theory and strategic behaviour.  
2. To provide a formal and intuitive understanding of solution concepts in game theory. 
3. To equip students with knowledge of simultaneous and extensive form games.  
4. To familiarise students with economic and behavioral applications of game theory.  
  
Learning Outcomes: 
1. Understanding of fundamentals of game theory: game forms, strategies, equilibrium notions, 
rationalizability, solution concepts and techniques. 
2. Students will be able to model strategic behaviour in various economic settings.  
3. Students will be equipped with formal knowledge of solution concepts and techniques wh ich 
have broad applications for problem solving in various strategic settings. 
  
Course Content: 
Introduction to strategic games (2 lectures) 
Strict and weak domination (2 lectures) 
Rationalizability and iterated elimination (4 lectures) 
Nash equilibrium (3 lectures) 
Pure and mixed strategies (3 lectures) 
Correlated equilibrium and strategies (1 lectures) 
Bayesian games and Bayesian equilibrium (2 lectures) 
Extensive form games (2 lectures) 
Games of perfect and imperfect information (2 lectures) 
Backward induction procedure (2 lectures) 
Repeated games: finite and infinite (3 lectures) 
Folk theorems (2 lectures) 
Reference Books: 
1. Martin J. Osborne and Ariel Rubinstein, "A Course in Game Theory", MIT Press (1994).  
2. Drew Fudenberg and Jean Tirole, "Game Theory", MIT Press (1991). 
3. Michael Maschler, Ellon Solan and Shmuel Zamir, "Game Theory", CUP (2013).  
  
Online Resources: 
   1. Game Theory, SOE -YCS4002 Stanford School of Engineering. 
https://online.stanford.edu/courses/soe-ycs0002-game-theory   
 
  
59 
 
Title Social and Economic Networks Number AIL7XX0 
Department/School AIDE (CMCE) L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech./PG/Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Individual and strategic decision 
making: theory and applications 
    
  
Objectives: 
1. To introduce students to formal methods of modeling formation and evolution of networks.  
2. To provide conceptual understanding of applications of network theory to social and economic 
problems. 
3. To provide knowledge of benchmark models. 
  
Learning outcomes: 
1. Students will be equipped to model and analyze a wide variety of social and economic networks. 
2. Students will gain an understanding of key concepts and important models. 
3. Students will be familiar with the tools required for strategic analysis of networks.  
  
Course content: 
Introduction to networks:  need for modeling networks, applications in economics and society. 
(3 lectures) 
  
Representing and measuring networks: nodes, players and graphs; types of networks; degree 
and density; degree distribution; clustering; cliquishness; centrality. (7 lectures) 
  
Random networks: Poisson networks; Markov graphs; Expected degree model etc.; properties of 
random networks. (8) 
  
Network games: stability; efficiency; diffusion and learning; strategic in teractions and network 
structure; equilibria notions; dynamic behavior and contagion.   (16) 
  
Economic applications: trade; information transmission and beliefs; public goods; influence etc. 
(9 lectures) 
  
  
Reference Books: 
1. Matthew O. Jackson, "Social and Economic Networks", Princeton University Press (2008).  
2. Gabrielle Demange and Myrna Wooders Eds. “Group Formation in Economics 
Networks, Clubs, and Coalitions”, Cambridge University Press (2005). 
3. Bhaskar Dutta and M atthew O. Jackson Eds. “Networks and Groups: Models of Strategic 
Formation”, Studies in Economic Design, Springer (2003). 
  
Research papers: 
1. Galeotti, A., Sanjeev Goyal, M. O. Jackson, Fernando Vega -Redondo, and Leeat Yariv. "Network 
Games." The Review of Economic Studies 77, no. 1 (2010): 218-44.  
  
2. Jackson, M.O. "Allocation Rules for Network Games,'' Games and Economic Behavior, Volume 51, 
Issue 1, April 2005, Pages 128-154. 
  
Online resources: 
“Social and Economic Networks: Models and Analysis”, SOHS -YECON0001, Stanford School of 
Humanities and Social Sciences. https://online.stanford.edu/courses/sohs-yecon0001-social-and-
economic-networks-models-and-analysis 
 
 
 
  
60 
 
 
 
Title Behavioral Economics and Decision 
theory 
Number AIL7XX0 
Department/School AIDE (CMCE) L-T-P [C] 3-0-0[3] 
Offered for B. Tech./P.G./Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Microeconomics-1     
  
  
Objectives: 
  
1. To familiarise students with standard models of individual decision-making. 
2. To equip students with different modeling techniques. 
3. To provide an overview of current literature in bounded rationality and it's intersections with 
AI. 
Learning Outcomes: 
1. Knowledge of fundamentals of decision theory and modeling techniques. 
2. A deep understanding of bounded rationality and formal approaches for modeling behavioral 
phenomena. 
3. Development of conceptual understanding required for application of decision theoretic 
models and framework to various relev ant settings such as online e -retailing, search 
algorithms, etc. 
  
Course Content: 
Rational choice: binary relations, preference orderings, representation theorems (7 lectures) 
Important axioms in choice theory, their relevance in characterizing choice and  underlying 
behavioral intuition: WARP, GARP, Independence axioms etc. (7 lectures) 
Decision theory models with boundedly rational agents:  imperfect attention, cognitive 
constraints, attribute based models, framing effects, etc. (7 lectures) 
Stochastic choice models: random utility model, Luce rule, two-stage decision making etc. (6 
lectures) 
Decision-making under uncertainty:  subjective probabilities, V -N-M theorem, de -Finetti's 
theorem, Savage's theorem, Anscombe-Aumann framework. (9 lectures) 
Applications of decision theory in AI: list-based decision making models and online search,  
e-retailing platforms, stop-and-choose decision rules, attention and online advertising etc. (7 
lectures) 
  
Reference Books: 
1. David M. Keeps, "Notes on the Theory of Choice", Westview Press (1988). 
2. Itzhak Gilboa, "Theory of Decision under Uncertainty", CUP (2009). 
3. Paul Anand, Prasanta Pattanaik and Clemens Puppe, "The Handbook of Rational and Social 
Choice", OUP (2009). 
4. Ariel Rubinstein, "Modeling Bounded Rationality", MIT Press (1998). 
5. Ran Spiegler, "Bounded Rationality and Industrial Organisation", OUP (2018).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
61 
 
 HSS - IV Philosophy, Policy, and Governance 
Title Introduction to Philosophy Number  HSL4XX0 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG Type Elective 
Prerequisite None     
 Objectives 
1.    Analyze and understand philosophical problems related to knowledge, science, and life  
2.    Familiarize with schools of thought which respond to the above problems 
3.    Evaluate the merits and demerits of these responses by developing one’s own stance 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Gather knowledge in evaluating philosophical problems within the analytic school of thought 
2. Acquaint oneself with the existential school of thought in philosophy 
3.  Develop intellectual responsiveness by discerning, debating and developing ideologies  
Contents 
Preliminaries: Reasoning: deduction, induction and abduction (scope and limits); Propositions: 
analytic and synthetic (viability of this distinction); Knowledge:  a priori and a posteriori; 
Definitions: types of definitions; Kinds: natural and social; Judgments: fact and value; Social 
phenomena: reasons, actions and justifications; Natural phenomena: causes, effects and 
explanations; Conditions: necessary and sufficient (10 lectures) 
Knowledge: Sources of knowledge; reason and experience; skepticism, rationalism and 
empiricism; The standard definition of knowledge: knowledge as justified true belief; 
difficulties with the standard definition; Gettier’s paradox: prop osals to overcome Gettier’s 
paradox; the naturalistic turn (8 lectures) 
Science: Nature of laws and theories in natural Science; Problems of confirmation; the problem 
of induction; Hempel’s approach; Theories of scientific explanation: epistemic, nomic and  
ontic; Socio-historical schools in philosophy of science; Thomas Kuhn and Paul Feyerabend 
(10 lectures) 
Life and Existence: Existentialist perspectives in philosophy: Nietzsche, Sartre and Camus; The 
existentialist perspectives on life: nihilism and the a bsurd; Nietzsche and Levinas: a 
comparison; Technology and alienation: Marxist views, Heidegger’s critique of technology; 
Feminism: the history of feminism, key thinkers, feminist critique of Western thought (14 
lectures) 
 Reference Books 
 1.    Hospers, J. (Ed.). (1968). Readings in Introductory Philosophical Analysis, London: Routledge & 
Kegan Paul. 
2.    Merilee, H. (Ed.). (1992). Introduction to the Philosophy of Science, New Jersey: Prentice Hall. 
3.    Blackham, H. J. (1961). Six Existentialist Thinkers, New York: Routledge. 
 Online Course Material 
1.  Kaufman, D.  Introduction to Philosophy, 2015, Missouri State University , 
www.openculture.com/philosophy_free_courses (Introduction to Philosophy) 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
62 
 
Title Fundamentals of Logic Number HSL4010 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG Type Elective 
Prerequisite None     
Objectives 
The main aims of the course are: 
(1)Learning effective methods to solve a variety of disagreements. 
(2)Obtaining the ability to  identify different types of arguments and evaluating them 
(3)Obtaining the ability to translate ordinary language into logical language  
 
Learning Outcomes 
(1)Developing the ability to prove valid arguments by using different methods of proof.  
(2)Realizing that proper use of logic is an effective and reasonable way in resolving disagreements. 
 
Contents 
 
 Introduction: Nature, scope and history of logic, various types of arguments, validity, truth and 
soundness, complexity of natural language, symbolization. 
 Propositional Logic: truth functions, truth tables, indirect truth tables, rules of implication, rules 
of replacement, indirect proof, conditional proof. 
 Syllogistic Logic: categorical propositions, quality, quantity, distribution, traditional square of 
opposition,  Venn diagrams and modern square of opposition, conversion, obversion and 
contraposition, categorical syllogisms, mood and figure, rules and fallacies. 
 Predicate Logic: symbols and translation, using rules of inference, change of quantifier ru le, 
conditional and indirect proof, relational predicates and identity. 
  
Reference Books: 
 
1. Hurley, Patrick (2008) Introduction to Logic(India edition) Imprint, Wadsworth. 
2. Copy, Irving (2006)Symbolic Logic Prentice-Hall of India, Pvt.Ltd. 
3. Lepore, Ernest and Cumming Sam (2009)Meaning and Argument  Wiley Blackwell. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
63 
 
Title Critical Thinking Number HSL4XXX 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG Type Elective 
Prerequisite None     
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1 Help the students in developing the ability to think critically and cogently  
3. Developing the ability to recognise fallacies and overcome them 
3- Appreciate the recent developments in the study of cognition that shed light on how reason is 
fallible in everyday life. 
Learning Outcomes 
1.Knowing 'how to think' and not just 'what to think' 
2. A critical mind set which includes being self critical 
3. Developing qualities like inquisitiveness, open mindedness and intellectual honesty.  
  
Lecture Modules/Contents: 
1. introduction :  The difference between normal thinking and critical thinking, Reason and its 
applications, The need for critical thinking(5 lectures) 
Empirical evidence for improvement in critical thinking, Marks of a critical thinker,  Four-Part Model 
for critical thinking (5 lectures) 
Cognitive  Illusions:: Illusions of thinking: conjunction fallacy, confirmation bias, base rates in 
Bayesian inference, illusory correlation, illusory control. Biases in deductive reasoning, Illusions of 
judgement: availability, representativeness, anchoring effect, validity effect, (5 lectures)  
 Illusions of memory: Moses illusion, orientation illusion, associative illusion, misinformation  effect, 
hindsight bias, illusions of change or stability(5 lectures) 
Fallacies in everyday reasoning : Fallacies of Relevance: appeal to force, appeal to pity, appeal to 
people, argument against the person, red derring, straw man, missing the point.(5 lectures)  
 Fallacies of Weak Induction: Appeal to unqualified authori ty, appeal to ignorance, hasty 
generalisation, false cause, slippery slope, weak analogy, Fallacies of Presumption:begging the 
question, complex question, false dichotomy, amphiboly, composition and division (6 lectures)  
Modeling Cognition: Two systems,Ada ptive Unconscious , Evolutionary Reasons,  Dolphin Model of 
cognition(5 lectures) 
 Practical lessons : Diagnosing fallacies, strategies to think without committing the fallacies.(5 
lectures) 
 
Reference Books: 
1.     Cognitive Illusions (2012) Rudiger F. Pohl (ed) Psychology Press, New York 
2.     Critical Thinking: An Exploration of Theory and Pracise ( 2007)Jennifer Moon, Routledge.  
3.     Thought and Knowledge: An Introduction to Critical Thinking (2013)Diane Halpern. Psychology 
Press. 
4.  An Introduction to Critical Thinking(2010) Madhucchanda Sen. Pearson 
Online Resource 
  https://www.reasoninglab.com/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
64 
 
Title Cognitive Semantics Number 32209/HSL4xxx 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG Type Elective 
Prerequisite None     
Objectives 
1.     To provide an overview of the field of cognitive semantics which tries to explain the 
phenomenon of linguistic meaning as part of overall cognitive capacities.  
2.     To explore the basis of ingrained assumptions concerning meaning, reason, imagination and 
understanding 
Learning Outcomes 
1.Understanding how linguistic capacity can arise out of overall cognitive capacities.  
2. Understanding how metaphors are all -pervasive in our lives and the need to revisit many of the 
metaphors used in day to day conceptualisations 
  
Course Contents 
 Introduction: Guiding principles, Generalisation commitment and cognitive commitment. Phenomena 
investigated within cognitive semantics,methodology and comparison with formal semantics (6 
lectures) 
  Embodiment: Image schemas and their properties, list of image schemas and their relation with 
abstract thought, conceptual structure(6 lectures) 
  Encyclopaedic view of meaning: word meaning versus sentence meaning, frame semantics, theory 
of domains (6 lectures) 
 Categorisation and Idealised Cognitive Models : Prototype theory, Idealised Cognitive Models.(6 
lectures) 
 Metaphor and Metonymy: Conceptual Metaphor Theory, Primary Metaphor Theory, Conceptual 
Metonymy(6 lectures) 
   Meaning Construction: Cognitive theory of meaning construction, the architecture of mental space 
construction, the dynamic nature of meaning construction (6 lectures) 
Reference Books 
1.    Evans, Vyvyan and Green Melaine(2006) Cognitive Linguistics: An Introduction   Edinburg 
University Press 
2.     Johnson, Mark (1987)Body in the Mind: The bodily basis of Meaning, Imagination and Reason , 
University of Chicago Press. 
3.    Lakoff, George and Johnson, Mark(199) Philosophy in the Flesh Basic Books. 
4.    Talmy, L (2003)Towards a Cognitive Semantics  MIT Press. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
65 
 
Title Philosophical Problems Number  HSL4020 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG Type Elective 
Prerequisite None     
  
Objectives 
1.   To help students developing a firm and well founded Weltanschauung 
2.   To encourage them looking beyond the phenomenal realities 
3.   To nurture inquisitive spirit 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Achieving a firm and well founded worldview 
2. Understanding the limits of human faculties and manmade sciences 
3.  Realizing the meaning of human life and existence 
  
Contents 
Introduction: Nature and Scope of Philosophical Inquiry; The Story of Philosophy; Methodology 
of Philosophy; Major Areas of Philosophy (8 lectures) 
Epistemological Problems: Nature of Knowledge; Sources of Knowledge: Eastern and Western 
Perspectives; Validity of Knowledge; Skepticism; Theories of Truth; The Problem of 
Perception; Objectivity; The View from Nowhere:  Philosophic (and Scientific) Concepts; 
Explanation; Causation; Evidenc e; Prediction; Probability; Determinism; Reduction; 
Generalization; Universals; Space and Time; Modeling and Simulation; Truth Value (10 
lectures) 
Metaphysical Problems : The Laws of Nature; Existence of World and Humanity; Free Will; 
Mind-Body Problem; Concept of God; The Life After (10 lectures) 
Ethical Problems: The Sense of Moral Obligation; Grounds of Morality; Moral Luck; Justice; 
Meaning of Life (14 lectures) 
Reference Books 
  
1.    Nagel, T. (1989). The View from Nowhere, London: Oxford University Press. 
2.    Parfit, D. (1986). Reasons and Persons, London: Oxford University Press. 
3.    Williams, B. (1986). Ethics and the Limits of Philosophy, Cambridge: Harvard University 
Press. 
4.    Perry, Bratman & Fisher. (1986).  Introduction to Philosophy: Clas sical & Contemporary 
Readings, London: Oxford University Press. 
Online Course Material 
1.  Reynolds, J.  Philosophical Problems, 2020, La Trobe University, 
www.openculture.com/philosophy_free_courses (Philosophical Problems) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
66 
 
Title Introduction to Indian Philosophy Number HSL4xx0 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0[3] 
Offered for UG Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives 
The course will: 
1. Present an overview of major schools of Indian thought 
2. Introduce major intellectual and cultural contributions of Indian philosophical traditions 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Identify the richness of Indian culture and wisdom 
2. Know the significance of Indian intellectual tradition in addressing contemporary issues 
 
Contents 
Indian Philosophy: Basic Features : Major traits; Major schools; value of the study of Indian 
philosophy 
The Vedic Tradition: The ideas of God and world; major concepts of the Vedas; metaphysics, moral 
life 
Carvaka, Buddhism and Jainism: Nastika schools, views of Carvaka; Jaina metaphysics, epistemology 
and ethics; Buddhism: the four noble truths and implications 
Six Great Systems: Nyaya, Vaisesika, Samkhya, Yoga, Purva Mimasa and Vedanta; Major concepts 
and contributions 
Advaita Vedanta: Monism; Concepts of God, world, self and liberation; visitadvaita and neovedantic 
traditions; significance of Advaitic philosophy today 
Modern Indian Thinkers: Vivekananda, S. Radhakrishnan, Gandhi, Aurobindo, Nehru, Narayana Guru 
 
Reference Books 
1. Radhakrishnan, S. (1999). Indian Philosophy vol 1&2, New York: Oxford. 
2. Chatterjee, S & Datta, D. (1984). An Introduction to Indian Philosophy . Calcutta: University of 
Calcutta 
3. Hirayanna, M. (2014). Outlines of Indian Philosophy. Delhi: Motilal Banarasidas. 
 
Online Resources 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/109/106/109106059/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
67 
 
Title Theories of Justice Number HSL4xx0 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0[3] 
Offered for UG Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives 
The course will: 
1. Introduce major philosophical positions on justice 
2. Present the role of justice in diverse contexts of sociopolitical life 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the philosophical foundations of the concept of justice 
2. Evaluate the present social order and envision a just social structure 
 
Contents 
Justice: Early Notions: Hellenistic tradition: Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle; the principle of 
harmony and order; major religious traditions; Indian tradition 
Justice in Utilitarian View: consequentialism; the idea of greatest welfare; balancing individual 
happiness and social welfare; major thinkers and seminal works 
Justice in Libertarian Position: role of liberty of individuals; rights and limits of the state; positive 
and negative liberty; classical and contemporary libertarian thinkers; merits and limitations 
of libertarian position 
Justice in Egalitarian View: equality and egality; idea of fairness; capabilities and dignity; concept 
of equal opportunity; major philosophers and works 
Justice in Contractualist Framework: justice being determined by the terms of contracts; the 
centrality of freedom; major thinkers and works; limitations of the contractualist position Applied 
Areas: distributive justice; procedural justice; international justice; intergenerational  
Justice; restorative justice 
 
Reference Books 
1. Aristotle. (2009). Nicomachean Ethics. W.D. Ross(trans). New York: Oxford University Press 
2. Bentham, J. (….) Utilitarianism 
3. Mill, J.S. (1993) On Liberty and Utilitarianism. New York: Random House 
4. Rawls, J. (2019). A Theory of Justice, New York: Penguin Random House 
5. Sandel, M. (1998). Liberalism and the Limits of Justice. Cambridge: Cambridge University. 
6. Sandel, M (ed.). 1984. Liberalism and Its Critics. New York: New York University Press. 
7. Sen, A. (2009). The Idea of Justice. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
8. Collste, G. (2015). Global Rectificatory Justice. New York: Palgrave Macmillian. 
 
Online Resources 
1. Michael Sandel-Harvard Lectures: available at: http://justiceharvard.org/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
68 
 
Title Gandhian Thought Number HSL4xx0 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0[3] 
Offered for UG Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives 
The course will: 
1. Introduce Gandhian philosophical concepts 
2. Present social, political, and cultural implications of Gandhian thought 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Assimilate Gandhian values in personal and social life 
2. Identify the relevance of Gandhian views to the present day world 
 
Contents 
Gandhian Thought: Introduction: Uniqueness of Gandhian thought; the necessity to turn to the 
Gandian views; the nature and scope of Gandhian philosophy; major works 
Major Inspirations to Gandhi: The triad: Thoreau, Ruskin, and Tolstoy; Indian philosophical 
traditions: the Upanisads and the Gita; religious traditions: Hinduism, Christianity, Jainism, 
and Islam 
Metaphysical Thoughts of Gandhi: Truth and God; Major virtues; The Higher Law 
Moral Philosophy: Peace and non-violence; means and ends; civic virtues; moralization of politics 
Political Philosophy ; Ideal state: Ramarajya; role of justice; the concept of democracy; 
satyagraha; role of morality in politics; nationalism and internationalism; swaraj; the 
Gandhian model in managing political disputes and maintaining international relations  
Views on Development and Technological Progress : Sarvodaya; Stewardship; decentralization; 
panchayati raj; bread -labor; swadeshi technologies; self -reliance; relevance of Gandhian 
views to a sustainable future. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Gandhi, M.K. (no date). The Story of My Experiments with Truth. Ahmedabad: Navjivan Trust. 
2. Sharma, G.R. (1995). An Intrudiction to Gandhian Thought. New Delhi: Atlantic. 
3. Kripalani, J.B. (1971). Gandhi: His Life and Thought . New Delhi: Publications Divisions, 
Government of India. 
4. Gandhi, M.K. (1968). Ethical Religion. Ahmedabad: Navjivan Trust. 
5. Gandhi, M.K. (1962). Village Swaraj. Ahmedabad: Navjivan Trust. 
6. Chandra, S. (2018). Gandhi: An Impossible Possibility. New Delhi: Routledge. 
 
Online Resources 
Not available 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
69 
 
Title Role of Technology in Development Number HS421/HSL4xx 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG Type Elective 
Prerequisite None     
Objectives: 
1. To provide an overview of the role of technology in the development of India 
 
Learning Outcomes: 
1. Gaining an ability to appreciate the role of engineers in the development of India  
2. Understanding the present status of development in India and the path to be followed for making 
the country developed. 
 
Course Contents: 
 Concept of Development: What  Development Means, Growth and development, the historical roots 
of the concept of development,  (6 lectures) 
Development as a Multi -dimensional Process,  physical and human capital in development, poverty 
and inequality(5 lectures) 
 Human Development,  Human Development Index, Sustainable Human Development,  Cultural 
Resistance to Development.(6 lectures) 
 Development of India: Post Independent period,  History of development and planning, Goal of self 
reliance , Industrial Policy and  Planning, Public Sector and Planning, Green revolution and its impact,  
Privatisation and Economic Reforms,  Globalization and its Impact on India,India at 21st 
century.(6lectures) 
 Status of technology in India: State of the Art in technology, Indian science and technology in  the 
fields of space, nuclear energy, different forms of renewable energy(6 lectures)  
Status of tech nology in India -energy, agriculture, defense, health care, telecommunications. The 
potential for low cost technology.(6 lectures) 
 Sustainable development and technology: Enviornment versus development, India and climate 
change, Towards low carbon economy (6 lectures) 
 
Reference: 
Mishra,S.K and Puri, V.K (2010) Indian Economy: Its Development Experience, Himalaya Publishing 
House. 
Dreze, Jean and Sen, Amartya(2013) Uncertain Glory: India and Its Contradictions, Princeton 
University Press. 
Kalam, Abdul, APJ and Rajan, Y S.(2014) Beyond 2020: A Vision for Tomorrow’s India   Penguin 
Books. 
Deb, Debal (2012)Beyond Developmentality: Constructing Inclusive Freedom and Sustainability, 
Daanish Books. 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
70 
 
Title Disaster risk reduction and management Number HSL4030 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG Type Elective 
Prerequisite Interest in Policy, Governance, Sustainability, 
Law, Gender or Interdisciplinary/cross-
discipline 
background 
  
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide an overview of the conceptual and critical understanding on policy measures on 
disaster governances. 
2. Introduce students to examine the role of decentralization of disaster resources and 
responsibilities, and best practice principles in preparedness, mitigatio n, response, recovery 
and reconstruction. 
3. Facilitate the students to understand the how disasters impact societies. 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Interpret the theories and concepts underlying the principles and practices of disaster risk 
reduction and management. 
2. Develop the capacity to participate in debates on disaster governance and societal 
reconstruction. 
3. By the end of the course, students will be able to understand the disaster resilience, risk 
mitigation, and recovery policies. 
 
Contents 
Introduction on Disaster Risk Reduction and Management (DRR&M) across space and time : (2 
lectures) 
Definition and types of disaster: hazards and disasters, risk and vulnerability in disasters, natural 
and man-made disasters (6 lectures) 
Risk management: nature, technocracy, and behavioural governance (4 lectures) 
Paradigm shifts in DRR&M: policy & governance issues, UN Agenda (5 lectures) 
Social and economic impact of disasters: class, communities and societies, disaster capitalism (6 
lectures) 
Gender and disaster: Feminist discourse (4 lectures) 
Rights and justice: humanitarian aid and CSOs in DRR&M (3 lectures) 
Mitigation and Management techniques of Disaster: basic principles of disasters management, 
disaster management cycle, national and state bodies for disaster management (6 lectures) 
Community-based disaster risk management discourse analyses: ‘bottom-up’ approaches’, 
community innovations (3 lectures) 
Disaster and Development Research: A way forward (2 lectures) 
 
Textbook: A handbook with all the study material will be given to the students. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Wisner B., Blaikie P., Cannon T. & Davis I., (2004), At risk: natural hazards, people’s 
vulnerability and disasters, 2nd edn, London: Routledge. 
2. UNSDR (2009). UNISDR terminology on disaster risk reduction. United Nations International 
Strategy for Disaster Reduction (UNISDR): Switzerland, Geneva. 
 
Online Course Material 
1. Pasupuleti, R.M., Disaster Recovery and Build Back Better, NPTEL Course Material, Indian 
Institute of Technology, Roorkee, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/124/107/124107010/  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
71 
 
Title Political and Cultural Ecology Number HSL4xx0 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives 
1. The course will examine society-ecology relationships at different scales. 
2. Provide a historical perspective to understand how past political and economic injustice in 
continuing environmental destruction. 
3. To know the actors and actions involved in various processes of sustainable development  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Analyze how inequalities of power and wealth on different scales contribute to ecological 
imbalance 
2. Critically analyze projects on sustainable development 
3. Know historical inequalities and lasting legacy in form of environmental destruction  
Contents 
1. What is Political and Cultural Ecology? Introduction to political ecology, its conceptual, 
historical and methodological origins - 10 
2. Social Constructions of Nature – What is social construction of nature?, Political ecology 
and constructivists approaches to nature, social constructions and community management of 
natural resources - 5 
3. Natural resource management and conservation – National parks, state -governed 
conservation, Rise of community based conservation and its critiques, critiques of different 
conservation techniques, Actors in conservation, Indian Context – 14 
4. Development, Degradation and Marginalization – Explore relationship between 
development and marginalization of particular communities, study actors and institutions 
involved in the studies - 8 
5. Neoliberalism and Environmental Governance – Neoliberalism and conservation, How do 
processes of neoliberalism affect ecology? Environmental management in a neo-liberal world – 5 
 
Text Books : 
 
Robbins, P. (2012). Political Ecology: A Critical Introduction. Oxford: Blackwell:Wiley 
 
Reference Books: 
 
1. Blaike, P. (1985). The Political Economy of Soil Erosion in Developing Countries. London: 
Longman 
2. Harvey, D. (2003). The New Imperialism. Oxford: OUP 
3. Vasan, S. (2006). Living with Diversity: Forestry Institutions in the Western Himalayas. IIAS: 
Shimla 
 
Online Course Material 
1. http://janux.ou.edu. 
 2. https://www.politicalecology.eu/ 
 
  
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
72 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11. Detailed Course Content 
of 
Open Electives 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
73 
 
Course title Description Course no. 
Popular classics Course content  HSL4XXX 
Introduction to film studies Course content  HSL2010 
Dalit Movement and Literaturesss Course content HSL7XXX 
Cine-politics under the national emergency Course content HSL7330 
Perspectives in language and literary studies Course content  DHL6010 
Introduction to Editing and Publishing Course content HSL7XXX 
Indian Cinemas: Many Histories Course content HSL7450 
Introduction to Literature from India’s Northeast Course content HSL7440 
Introduction to Contemporary Arts Course content HSL4XXX 
Introduction to Performance Studies Course content HSL7XXX 
Modern Indian Theatre Course content HSL7XXX 
World Literature and Global Cinema Course content HSL7XXX 
Globalization and culture Course content  HSL4XXX 
Sociology of Science and Technology Course content HSL7XXX 
Culture, art and heritage Course content HS321 
Gender and society Course content HSL7360 
Global Health Course content HSL7XXX 
Health Policy, Systems and Financing  Course content HSL7XXX 
History and philosophy of science Course content  HSL7410 
Foundation of sustainability Course content HSL4040 
Climate change and society Course content HSL7XXX 
74 
 
Politics of water governance Course content HSL7420 
Aesthetics Course content 32208/HSL4XXX 
Bioethics Course content HSL4080 
Consciousness Course content  HS729 
Principles of psychology Course content  HSL3010 
Basics of leadership Course content  HS411 
Life and professional skill development Course content  32205/HSL4XXX 
Positive psychology and well-being Course content  HSL4060 
Consumer culture and commodities Course content  HSL7XXX 
Civilizations, Cultures, and Technologies (DH) Course content DJL6XXX 
Images, Imaginations, and Digital Cultures (DH) Course content DHL6XXX 
Fundamental of Digital Humanities (DH) Course content DHL7010 
New media studies (DH) Course content DHL5XXX 
Digital Cinema (DH) Course content DHL5XXX 
Network Cultures Course content HSL7XXX 
Masculinities in/and the Global South Course content HSL7XXX 
Energy Humanities Course content HSL7XXX 
Theories of Intelligence (SOI) (OE) Course content  CG4XX 
Advance Cognitive Processes (SOI) (OE) Course content CGL4010 
Engineering Psychology  Course content HS4XX 
Cognitive Psychology Course content  HS4XX 
Introduction to Cognitive Neuroscience Course content  HS7XX 
75 
 
Introduction to Cultural Studies Course content DHL7XX0 
Analysis of Social Media Networks (DH) Course content DHL7XX0 
Digital Storytelling Course content DHL7XX0 
Human Factors in Interaction Design (DH) Course content DHL7XX0 
Selected topics in HSS I Course content  HSL7XX0 
Selected topics in HSS II Course content HSL7XX0 
Selected topics in HSS III Course content HSL7XX0 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
76 
 
 Title Popular Classics Number HS 3xx 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG Type Elective 
Prerequisite None     
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1.    Introduce students to a global canvas of popular classics in both literature and 
films. 
2.    Facilitate the students to understand a spectrum of values, experiences and ideas 
over the ages. 
3. Contextualize literature and films in the context of global cultures, li teratures, 
movements and technologies 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.    Access enhanced creative and critical abilities, practice close reading, develop 
skills in structuring arguments and interpretations. 
2.  Create, engage and to build their personal narratives by creative interactions 
and discussions. 
3.  Reflect upon the diversity of cultures, values and creative practices from 
around the world and within the country 
Contents: 
Introduction – High Cultures and Popular Cultures 
Literary Devices and Elements of Fiction  – Plot, Characters, Setting, Narration, Voices, 
Point of View, Conflict. 
Adaptations – Theories of Adaptations, Forms, Adapters, Contexts, Appeals, Audiences.  
Genres – Detective Fiction, Historical fiction, Travel Writings, Life Writings, Subaltern fiction, 
Regional fiction, Fantasy and Fiction 
Literary Analysis – Close reading, Interpretations, Critical Appreciation. 
Prescribed books and films: 
1. The Guide - R.K.Narayan 
2. The Kite Runner - Khaled Hosseini. 
3. The Help - Kathryn Stockett. 
4. Murder on the Orient Express - Agatha Christie. 
5. Hound of the Baskervilles- Sherlock Holmes. 
6. Motorcycle Diaries - Che Guevera. 
7. Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K.Rowling. 
8. Les Miserables - Victor Hugo. 
9. To Kill a Mocking Bird - Harper Lee. 
10. Hotel Rwanda - Terry George and Keir Pearson. 
11. The Life of Pi - Yann Martel. 
Reference Books 
1. Stam, Robert and A.Raengo.eds Literature and Film: A Guide to the theory of Film 
and 
  Adaptation. Blackwell Publishing: Philadelphia, 2005. 
2. Hutchinson, Linda. Theoryof Adaptation. Routledge: New York, 2006. 
Online Course Material 
 Rashmi Gaur. Literature, Culture and Media. Department of Humanities and Social  
 Sciences,IIT Roorke. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/109107139 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
77 
 
 Title Introduction to Film Studies Number HSL2XXX 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG Type Elective 
Prerequisite None     
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1.   Help students to explore the phenomenon of cinema as a scientific invention, as a 
cultural form and as a public institution 
2.   Help students to become familiar with some of the  most significant events and 
movements in the history of transnational cinema 
3.   Introduce aesthetic, historical, cultural and political aspects of cinema and its 
mainstream and alternative histories in order to understand the medium as mass -culture as 
well as an experimental one 
  
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.   Read film as a complex cultural/political/aesthetic text 
2.   Explore global film histories and (re)locate the cultural -cinematic history of the Indian 
nation-state within it 
3.   Develop acquaintance with concepts, theories and modes of writing on cinema, exploring 
English as well as non-English sources (in translation) 
  
Contents 
Introducing Cinema as an art form, early cinema, apparatus, sound and colo ur: Basic 
aspects of cinema and its history since the silent era  
Film movements, auteur, genre: Case studies (the Italian Neo -Realism/the French New 
Wave for movement, Western/Gangster/Film Noir as genre, Ray/Ghatak as auteur)  
Film criticism and cinematic  writing: Criticism workshops, modes of writing (mimetic 
etc.), exploration of reading strategies 
Many Histories of Indian Cinemas: Histories of Bombay cinema and the city of Mumbai, 
Indian arthouse, fans, stars and cine-politics in South Indian cinemas 
The ‘other’ continents : Case studies (Latin American cinemas as a case study, with 
explorations of cinemas from Brazil and/or Argentina) 
Cinema and the Contemporary: The Age of the Digital, digital cinema and cinephilia, the 
transitional phase from the celluloid to the digital, copyright and piracy, introduction 
to new media theories, the changing exhibition space, audio-visual essays  
Textbooks 
1. Bordwell, D., and Thompson, K., (2012), Film Art: An Introduction, McGraw-Hill. 
Reference Book 
1. Martin, A., (2014), Mise en Scène and Film Style: From Classical Hollywood to New Media 
Art, Palgrave Macmillan. 
2. Prasad, M. M., (2014), Cine-Politics: Film Stars and Political Existence in South India , 
Orient Blackswan. 
Online Course Material 
1.   http://sensesofcinema.com/category/great-directors/ 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
78 
 
Title Dalit Movement and Literature Number HSL7xx0 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 
Offered for UG and PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. Help students to explore the intricacies of concepts such as nation and nationalism, 
caste, caste oppression, and caste as an exercise of power 
2. Help students to become familiar with theorizations on dalits and untouchability, 
alternative/non-normative histories of nation, literature and culture 
3. Make students familiar with the vast corpus of dalit literature that challenges the 
hierarchical mode of existing, standard-received histories of Indian literature 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Develop a basic engagement with dalit movements, histories and literatures  
2. Develop alternative ways and modes of reading existing literary and cultural histories 
3. Develop a theoretically nuanced understanding of ‘difference’ and ‘exceptionalism’ 
in the literature of the oppressed 
 
Contents 
Introducing the Dalit: Dalit as opposed to ‘Harijan’, Reading Ambedkar, Phule and others, 
critique of the Gandhian thought on the lower-caste, the Gandhi-Ambedkar debate (10 
lectures) 
The Old and the New: Critique of the more traditional schools of dalit criticism such as the 
works of D. R. Nagaraj and others, reading histories of movements such as the dalit 
panther and their manifesto, philosophical exploration of untouchability as manifested 
in Aniket Jaaware’s works (10 lectures) 
Literatures and Challenges: Dalit modernity, dalits in and after the 1990s, dalit 
autobiographies, challenging the canonical literatures, identity politics and writing (10 
lectures) 
Literary instances: Dalit writings from Eastern India (Adwaita Mallabarman), Western India 
(Marathi writings of Baburao Bagul, Sharankumar Limbale), and Southern India (G. 
Kalyana Rao, Challapalli Swaroopa Rani, B. Krishnappa, Siddalingaiah, Devanoora 
Mahadeva, Bama, 
C. Ayyappan et al.) (12 lectures) 
 
Textbooks 
1. Satyanarayana, K., and Tharu, S., (eds.) (2013), The Exercise of Freedom: An 
Introduction to Dalit Writing, Navayana. 
2. Jaaware, A., (2018), Practicing Caste: On Touching and Not Touching , Orient 
Blackswan. 
3. Satyanarayana, K., and Tharu, S., (eds.) (2011), No Alphabet in Sight: New Dalit 
Writing from South India, Dossier I: Tamil and Malayalam, Penguin. 
4. Satyanarayana, K., and Tharu, S., (eds.) (2013), From those Stubs, Steel Nibs are 
Sprouting: New Dalit Writing from South India, Dossier II: Kannada and Telugu , 
HarperCollins. 
 
Reference Book 
1. Rege, S., (ed.) (2006), Writing Caste, Writing Gender: Narrating Dalit Women’s 
Testimonies, Zubaan. 
2. Dangle, A., (ed.) (1992), Poisoned Bread: Translations from Modern Marathi Dalit 
Literature, Orient Longman. 
 
Online Course Material 
NPTEL course on caste in Indian English fiction is available 
at: https://nptel.ac.in/courses/109/106/109106135/ 
 
 
 
 
79 
 
Title Cine-Politics under the National 
Emergency 
Number HSL7330 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG and PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite None     
Objectives 
 The instructor will: 
1.   Help students to explore the intricacies of cultural forms and practices in the larger context 
of the political lives of the Indian nation 
2.   Help students to become familiar with some of the most significant events in the history of 
post-independence India through the prism of film history and state policy 
3.   Make students familiar with conceptual apparatuses in cinema studies and with the overlaps 
between political and cultural histories 
  
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.   Read archival and other materials that are relevant for history-writing 
2.   Explore associations between public institutions, national history, mass and avant -garde 
culture and the ever-changing socio-politico-cultural dynamics 
3.   Develop acquaintance with contemporary scholarly writings on Indian history, cinema and 
politics 
  
Contents 
Introducing Emergency and its Politics : The National Emergency, historical traje ctory, 
relevance in Indian politics, literature review 
Cinema, Cine -Politics and Cultural Politics : Defining Cine -Politics, Nation -Industry 
negotiations, carrying out cine -archival research, reading of film industry and film 
society materials/publications,  review of relevant theoretical schools in Indian cinema 
studies   
Sponsorship and Censorship: The Indian New Wave and Other Cinemas , censorship, Prime 
Minister’s 20-point program, role of I&B ministry, industrial responses, Indian New Wave 
and state -sponsored cinema in the 1970s, debates on state sponsorship and film 
economy 
Globalization of the Dictatorial in the 1970s: Digital Remembering , the idea of the 
dictatorial, ideological associations between global dictatorial regimes,  cine-cultural 
evidence and responses, archiving of evidence in the days of the digital, conclusion 
  
Textbooks 
1. Rajadhyaksha, A., (2009), Indian Cinema in the Time of Celluloid: From Bollywood to the 
Emergency, Indiana University Press. 
Reference Book 
1. Joshi, P., and Rajinder D ., (eds.) (2014), The 1970s and Its Legacies in India’s Cinemas , 
Routledge. 
Online Course Material 
1. https://indiancine.ma/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
80 
 
 Title Perspectives in Language and 
Literary Studies 
Number DHL6010 
Department IDRP: DH L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-0-1 [4] 
Offered for M.Sc. DH First Year only; B.Tech Electives; 
B.Tech Minor in DH 
Type Compulsory for DH and 
Elective for all others 
Prerequisite None     
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce students to theories of literature. 
2. Introduce students to basic theories of language, linguistics concepts, and literary cultures in 
translation. 
3. Provide the students with a background in the development of computational tools for literary 
analysis 
  
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.    Understand major trajectories in literary thought, trace the evolution of literary genres, 
and contextualize their contemporary significance. 
2.    Understand fundamental aspects of language and linguistic analysis. 
3.    Critically analyse literary texts using digital tools.    
  
Contents 
History of English Language and Literature: Literary Canon, Historical Events and Linguistic Shifts, 
Impact of technology on evolution of literature (5 lectures) 
Literary Genres: The Epic, Drama, The Advent of the Novel, Poetry (6 lectures) 
Literary Analysis and Criticism: Formalism, Close Reading and Textual Analysis, Structure, pattern, 
motif and metaphor analysis (5 lectures) 
Fundamentals of Linguistics : Language Families, Syntax, Morphology, Phonology, Pragmatics (5 
lectures) 
Applied Linguistics: Theories of Language and Language Learning, Corpus and Discourse Analysis, 
Digital Tools for Language Learning and Textual Analysis (5 lectures) 
Literary Cultures around the World: American Literature, World Lit erature, Literatures of the 
Commonwealth, Postcolonial and New Writing, South Asian Literatures (10 lectures)  
Literature in the Digital Age: Cyberpunk fiction, Steampunk fiction, Science fiction, Digital Humanities 
Tools for Literary Analysis, Discourse an d Corpus Analysis with Digital Tools, Data driven Literary 
Analysis (6 lectures) 
 
Textbooks 
1. Terry Eagleton. 1983. Literary Theory: An Introduction. Minneapolis: University of 
Minnesota Press. 
2.    Abrams, M.H. A Glossary of Literary Terms. Cengage,2013. 
3.    Barry, Peter. Beginning Theory: An Introduction to Literary and Cultural Theory. 
Manchester University Press, 2002. 
4. Sheldon Pollock. 2003. Literary Cultures in History: Reconstructions from South Asia. 
Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Self Learning Material 
1. Merin Simi Raj, History of English Language and Literature, Department of Humanities and 
Social Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology -Madras, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/109106124/. 
2. Rajesh Kumar and Shreesh Chaudhary, Introduction to Modern Linguistics, Department of 
Humanities and Social Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology -Madras, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/109/106/109106080/. 
3. Sayan Chattopadhyay, Introduction to Literary Theory, Department of Humanities and Social 
Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology -Kanpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/109/104/109104135/. 
  
 
81 
 
Title Introduction to Editing and 
Publishing 
Number HS7XX 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0[3] 
Offered for UG and PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives  
The instructor will: 
1. Provide an overview of a modern publishing industry, its history, and its various processes with 
special focus on the roles of editors 
2. Equip the students with the practical skills and knowledge required to enter this industry   
 
Learning Outcomes  
Students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Perform the skills of basic editing and publishing as editors while also acquiring the knowledge 
of the language and tools of editing 
2. Know and understand the processes of the industry that will prepare them for employability  
 
Contents  
Part    Part 1: Overview 
1. History of publishing (2 lectures) 
2. Various kinds of publishing (2 lectures) 
3. Structure and processes of and opportunities in a publishing house (2 lectures)  
4. What is editing and what are the roles of an editor (2 lectures) 
5. Difference between editing, copyediting, and proofreading (1 lectures) 
6. The future of editing: online editing and its opportunities (1 lecture) 
Part 2: Understanding the editorial process 
1. Commissioning manuscripts (1 lecture) 
2. Working with writers (1 lecture) 
3. Pre-editing or formatting (1 lecture) 
2. Copyediting (1 lecture) 
3. Proofreading (1 lecture) 
4. Language of editing: The editing markups and style guides (2 lectures) 
5. Tools of editing: Grammar and its various components (3 lectures) 
Part 3: The practice of editing 
Practical sessions on different for ms of editing and stages of the editorial process on different 
media:  
1. Citations (print and electronic) 
2. Hard-copy editing and editing on the screen 
3. Working with MS Word  
(12 lectures) 
Part 4: Interaction with industry experts with focus on ethical and legal issues 
This may be in the form of internship opportunities, workshops, field visits, or guest lectures (10 
lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Chicago Manual of Style. 2017. 17th Edn. Chicago, Illinois: University of Chicago Press 
2. Sabin, William A. The Gregg Reference Manual: A Manual of Style, Grammar, Usage, and 
Formatting. 2005. 10th Edn. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill/Irwin 
3. Kesavan, Bellary Shamanna. 1985, 1988. History of Printing and Publishing in India: A Story of 
Cultural Re-awakening. 2 vol. New Delhi: National Book Trust 
4. Butcher, Judith et al. Butcher's Copy-editing: The Cambridge Handbook for Editors, Copy-editors 
and Proofreaders. 2006. 4th edn. New York, NY: Cambridge UP 
5. Devasar, Nitasha. Publishers On Publishing: Inside India’s Book Business 
6. Gupta, Abhijit and Swapan Chakravorty. Print Areas: Book History in India 
7. ---. Move-able Type: Book history in India 
 
Reference Books  
1. Mackenzie, Janet. The Editor’s Companion . 2011. 2nd Edn. Cambridge University Press, 
Melbourne: Cambridge University Press 
82 
 
2. Dunham, Steve. The Editor’s Companion: An Indispensable Guide to Editing Books, Magazines, 
Online Publications, and More. 2014. Blue Ash, OH: Writer’s Digest Books 
3. Guthrie, Richard. Publishing: Principles and Practice. 2011. London: Sage 
4. Truss, Lynne. Eats, Shoots & Leaves: The Zero Tolerance Approach to Punctuation . 2004. New 
York, NY: Gotham Books 
5. Greene, Robert Lane. You Are What You Speak: Grammar Grouches, Language Laws, and the 
Politics of Identity. 2011. New York, NY: Delacorte Press 
 
Online Course Materials  
1. https://blog.reedsy.com/learning/courses/publishing/ 
2. eDX course: The Book: The History of the Book in the 17th and 18th Century Europe  at 
https://www.edx.org/course/the-book-the-history-of-the-book-in-the-17th-and-1 
 
 
  
83 
 
Title Indian Cinemas: Many 
Histories 
Number HSL7XX 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG and PhD Type Elective  
Prerequisite None    
 
Objectives  
The instructor will:  
1. Help students in exploring the intricacies of historiography in general and film historiography in 
particular  
2. Help students to become familiar with some of the most significant schools and modes of film 
history-writing in the context of India and its many cine-cultural industries  
3. Make students familiar with conceptua l apparatuses in film history and their overlaps with 
national and global political and cultural histories 
 
Learning Outcomes  
     The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Engage with complex discursive formulations in historiography  
2. Explore associations between multiple histories of a specific site of inquiry 
3. Develop acquaintance with contemporary scholarly writings on Indian film history, politics and 
cultural formations  
 
Contents  
 
What is Film History? : Readings on film history, many hist ories, historiographies, history -writing   
methods, contemporary history (4 lectures) 
Colonial Histories: Priya Jaikumar’s work on empire cinema, Lee Grieveson’s anthology on empire 
cinema (2 lectures) 
National Histories: Sumita S. Chakravarty’s work on Indian cinema and the nation-state (2 lectures) 
Ideological Histories : M. Madhava Prasad’s Marxist -ideological study, history of ideas and their 
textual-cinematic evidences (2 lectures) 
Institutional Histories : Peter Sutoris’ work on the Films Division, Sudh a Tiwari’s articles on 
FFC/NFDC, histories of the film society movement (2 lectures) 
The Biographical-Historical: M. S. S. Pandian’s work on M. G. Ramchandran, Theodore Baskaran’s 
biography of Sivaji Ganesan (1 lecture) 
Economic History: Ashish Rajadhyaksh a on Bombay industry’s illegitimacy, the underbelly of the 
city and its economy (2 lectures) 
History of Exhibition : S. V. Srinivas’ article on cinema hall and its public in South India, 
Adrian   Athique on multiplex and the changing viewing practices (2 lectures) 
Global History: Ravi S. Vasudevan on global histories of Indian cinema, transnational cinema as 
method, Sudha Rajagopalan on the reception of Bombay cinema in the USSR, Nitin Govil’s narratives 
of encounter between Hollywood and Bombay (4 lectures) 
The Anthropological/Ethnographic: S. V. Srinivas on stardom, fan club and ethnographic research 
in Andhra Pradesh, Uma Bhrugubanda’s anthropological research on the citizen -devotee, Anand 
Pandian’s anthropological research on Tamil cinema (8 lectures) 
Genre Histories: Meheli Sen and Kartik Nair’s works on Indian horror films, Darshana Sreedhar Mini 
and Ratheesh Radhakrishnan on soft porn in South India/Kerala (3 lectures) 
Corporeal Histories: Usha Iyer’s recent work on dancing women, Meheli Sen & Anustup Basu’s edited 
book on figurations in Indian film (2 lectures) 
Spatial Historiography: Priya Jaikumar’s recent work on India as filmed space, Kaushik Bhaumik’s 
dissertation on Bombay’s urban history and cinema, Ranjani Mazumdar’s work on Bombay cinema 
and the city (8 lectures) 
  
 
Textbooks 
1. Allen, R. C., and Gomery, D., (1985), Film History: Theory and Practice, Alfred A. Knopf.  
2. Jaikumar, P., (2006), Cinema at the End of Empire: A Politics of Transition in Britain and India , 
Duke University Press. 
3. Chakravarty, S. S., (1993), National Identity in Indian Popular Cinema 1947-1987, University of 
Texas Press.  
84 
 
4. Prasad, M. M., (1998), Ideology of the Hindi Film: A Historical Construction , Oxford University 
Press. 
5. Sutoris, P., (2016), Visions of Development : Films Division of India and the Imagination of 
Progress, 1948-75, Oxford University Press. 
6. Rajagopalan, S., (2009), Indian Films in Soviet Cinemas: The Culture of Movie-Going after Stalin, 
Indiana University Press. 
7. Srinivas, S. V., (2009), Megastar: Chiranjeevi and Telugu Cinema after N. T. Rama Rao, Oxford 
University Press. 
8. Bhrugubanda,  U. M., (2018), Deities & Devotees: Cinema, Religion, and Politics in South India, 
Oxford University Press. 
9. Pandian, A., (2015), Reel World: An Anthropology of Creation, Duke University Press.    
10. Jaikumar, P., (2019), Where Histories Reside: India as Filmed Space, Duke University Press.  
 
Reference Books  
1. Grieveson, L., and MacCabe, C., (eds.) (2011) Film and the End of Empire, Bloomsbury.  
2. Pandian, M. S. S., (2015), The Image Trap: M. G. Ramachandran in Film and Politics, Sage.  
3. Iyer, U., (2020), Dancing Women: Choreographing Corporeal Histories of Hindi Cinema , Oxford 
University Press.  
4. Govil, N. (2015), Orienting Hollywood: A Century of Film Culture between Los Angeles and 
Bombay, New York University Press. 
5. Sen. M., and Basu, A., (eds.) (2013), Figurations in Indian Film, Palgrave Macmillan. 
6. Sen, M., (2017), Haunting Bollywood: Gender, Genre, and the Supernatural in Hindi Commercial 
Cinema, Orient Blackswan. 
7. Mazumdar, R., (2007), Bombay Cinema: An Archive of the City, University of Minnesota Press.   
8. Journal articles, book chapters, unpublished dissertations of Vasudevan, Rajadhyaksha, Srinivas, 
Athique, Tiwari, Mini, Radhakrishnan, Bhaumik will be provided by the instructor.     
 
Online Course Material 
1. https://indiancine.ma/  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
85 
 
Title Introduction to Literatures from 
India’s Northeast 
Number HSL7440 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0[3] 
Offered for UG and PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   
Objectives  
The instructor will: 
1. Introduce select texts from all eight states in India’s Northeast 
2. Explain the context of each text 
3. Focus primarily on novels, poems, and short stories with the exception of one song -text (to be 
read as a poem) 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
  1. Identify and understand at least one literary and one thematic issue from each text  
  2. Know about the heterogeneity of this forcefully homogenized and ‘invented’ region  
 
Contents  
Before We Begin: Understanding the Contexts 
1. History of state formation: ‘Invented’ homogeneity and partition (3 lectures) 
2. Culture of violence: ‘Disturbed’ area, AFSPA, nation and nationalism (2 lectures)  
3. Introducing the eight states (1 lectures) 
Starting Out with the Texts 
1. Mamang Dai’s The Legends of Pensam: The language question: the writer and her readers; 
Ecocritical concern through the Adi worldview (5 lectures) 
2. Indira Goswami’s Pages Stained with Blood: The writer and the translation; The 1984 anti -
Sikhs riots through an Assamese’s eyes (5 lectures) 
3. ‘Miyah’/’Miya’ Poetry: Hafiz Ahmed’s “Write Down ‘I am a Miyah’”: The writer and his new 
language of protest; NRC and the ‘Na-Asamiya Muslims’ (2 lectures) 
4. Mufidun Nisa’s “Wait, Flower, Don’t Bloom”: A Pangal writer in Manipur (Meitei) literary circle; 
The Meitei-Pangal clash of 1993 in Manipur (2 lectures) 
5. Kshetrimayum Subadani’s “The Heat and the Agony”: ILP and the migrant workers in Manipur 
(2 lectures) 
6. Esther Syiem’s Memoir in Water: Speaks the  Wah Umkhrah: Oral culture in Syiem; Khasi 
matrilineal society (5 lectures) 
7. Rokunga’s “ Ro Min Relsak Ang Che  (Aw nang kan Lal kan Pathian )”: Mizo national 
consciousness in songs (2 lectures) 
8. Mona Zote’s “An Impression of Being Alive”: The Korean influence in Mizo writing (2 lectures) 
9. Temsula Ao’s “The Jungle Major” from These Hills Call Home: Stories from a War Zone : 
Narrating the collective; The Naga conflict (2 lectures) 
10. Rajendra Bhandari’s Kshar/Akshar (“Perishable/Imperishable”): Nepali poetry of Sikkim; 
Ponderings on the ‘global in Gangtok’ (2 lectures) 
     11. Yishey Doma’s Legends of the Lepchas: Folk Tales from Sikkim : Agriculture/farming in 
Lepcha folktales (2 lectures) 
     12. Shefali Debbarma’s “Lamination”: Kokborok writing of Tripura; Identity politics: The dress 
and the Schedule Tribe (ST) card (2 lectures) 
Explorations: A Step Further (along with Starting Out with the Texts) 
1. Author-centric criticism 
2. Reader-centric criticism 
3. Text-centric criticism 
4. Context-centric criticism 
 
Textbook  
     As mentioned in Starting Out with the Texts 
Reference Books  
     An exhaustive list to be shared to interested students 
Online Course Materials  
The chapter titled “Writings in English from the Northeast: Reading Temsula Ao” from the NPTEL 
course Indian Fiction in English is available at: 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/109/106/109106135/ 
 
 
86 
 
Title Introduction to Contemporary Arts Number HS 4XX 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG and PhD Type Elective  
Prerequisite None    
 
Objectives  
The instructor will:  
1. Introduce the world of visual art through a sneak peek into art histories and movements in 
India and in the world 
2. Train the students to develop an eye for interpreting and understanding visual experiences 
and representations 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Appreciate different forms of creative and visual arts   
2. Map histories of art movements in India and in the world 
3. Understand and appreciate the aesthetic and philosophical aspects of visual representations 
 
Contents  
Introduction to visual arts with a focus on contemporary arts: Art, artwork, artworld (2 lectures)  
 
Pre-‘modern’ precedents: 
Art history and major art movements in the world (from classical to modern) (1 lecture) 
Histories of ancient and medieval Indian art: Styles of Mughal, Rajput, Pahari, and Southern India 
(1 lecture) 
Renaissance perspective and Indian resistance (1 lecture) 
 
Major ‘modern’ Indian artists and art groups:  
Colonized nation: Ravi Varma and the Bengal School; Amrita Sher -Gill and Indian modernist art; 
Rabindranath Tagore/Jamini Roy and Primitivism (6 lectures) 
Making (of) the nation : The Bombay artist: M F Hussain; Lahore art circle: Zubeida Agha; 
Bangladesh Shilpakala Academy: Zainul Abedin (6 lectures) 
Contesting (the) nation:  Sudhir Patwardhan; Bikash Bhattacharjee’s hyper -realism; Khakhar’s 
‘Pop’ art; Nalini Malani; Rokeya Sultana; Amruta Patil; Laishram Meena Devi (14 lectures)  
Representing the regions (of the nation): 
Folk art forms: Warli, Patachitra or Pattachitra, Kalamkari, Phad painting; Kalam (Kalamezhuthu); 
Tanjore painting; Madhubani painting (7 lectures) 
 
New modes of representation: 
Conceptual and performance arts (1 lecture)  
Experimental cinema (1 lecture) 
Installation art (1 lecture) 
New modes of exhibition: Digital art and exhibition (1 lecture) 
 
Textbooks 
1. Mitter, Partha. Indian Art 
1. Guha-Thakurta, Tapati. The Making of New Indian Art 
2. Anand, Anand K, et al. Aesthetic Theories and Forms in Indian Tradition 
3. Reiss, Julie H. From Margin to Center: The Spaces of Installation Art 
4. Carrier, David. A World Art History and Its Objects 
5. Bentkowska-Kafel,Anna. Digital Art History: A Subject in Transition 
6. Chatterji, Roma. Speaking with Pictures: Folk Art and the Narrative Tradition in India 
7. Gell, Alfred. “Vogel's Net: Traps as Artworks and Artworks as Traps.” The Art of Anthropology: 
Essays and Diagrams 
8. Danto, Arthur. “The Artworld” 
9. Becker, Howard. Art Worlds 
10. Gombrich, Ernst. Art and Illusion 
11. Arnheim, Rudolf. Art and Visual Perception 
Reference Book  
87 
 
1. Guha-Thakurta, Tapati. Monuments, Objects, Histories: Institutions of Art in Colonial and Post-
Colonial India 
2. Upjohn, Everard M, et al. History of World Art 
3. Foster,Gwendolyn Audrey and Wheeler W. Dixon. Experimental Cinema: The Film Reader 
4. Cole, Bruce and Adelheid M. Gealt. Art of the Western World: From Ancient Greece to Post 
Modernism 
 
Online Course Material 
1. Asia Art Archive at: https://aaa.org.hk/en 
2. NPTEL web course titled Modern Indian Art From the Colonial Period to the Present available 
at: https://nptel.ac.in/courses/109/104/109104176/ 
3. NPTEL web course titled Visual Perception and Art: A Survey Across the Cultures available 
at: https://nptel.ac.in/courses/109/104/109104122/ 
4. NPTEL web course titled Introducing Modern Western Art: Movements and Artists available 
at: https://nptel.ac.in/courses/109/104/109104117/ 
5. NPTEL web course titled Folk and Minor Art in India available at: 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/109/104/109104106/ 
6. NPTEL web course titled Introduction to Indian Art - An appreciation available at: 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/109/104/109104102/ 
7. NPTEL web course titled Elements of Visual Representation available at: 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/109/104/109104088/ 
 
 
  
88 
 
 
Title Introduction to Performance Studies in 
India 
Number HS 7XX 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG and PhD Type Elective  
Prerequisite None    
 
Objectives  
The instructor will:  
1. Introduce critical theoretical terms associated with performance studies in India 
2. Provide an overview of various folk performative traditions in India 
3. Explore the ‘political’ dimensions of these traditions 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the difference between key theatrical terms in performance studies and 
aesthetics in the Indian context 
2. Identify and know major moments in the history of performance linking various theatrical 
traditions with their unique practitioners 
3. Get acquainted with the ‘politics’ of theatrical performance and aesthetics in India  
 
Contents  
Introduction to performance: Drama, script, theater/theatricality, performance/performativity, 
mimesis, presence, and materiality (2 lectures) 
Performance theories: Richard Schechner,  Aparna Dhareshwar, Rustom Barucha, Erika Fischer-
Lichte, and Marvin Carlson (5 lectures) 
Performance histories: In India and in the world (2 lectures) 
Traditions from the ‘other’ of India: 
Aristotle’s Poetics: The notion of the ‘plot’ (2 lectures) 
Brechtian ‘narration’ versus Aristotelian ‘plot/action’: Bertolt Brecht as background to ‘political’ 
performance practices (2 lectures) 
The Indian experiences: 
Bharata’s Natya Shastra  and Kalidas’s Abhigyan Shakuntalam  with focus on the rasa theory 
(abhinaya vs vritti) (3 lectures) 
Indian folk experiments: Utpal Dutt and Jatra, Habib Tanvir and Chhattisgarhi nacha, Girish Karnad 
and Yakshagana, Vijay Tendulkar and tamasha; Kathputli: the puppetry theatre of Rajasthan; 
Bhand Pather: the folk theatre of Kashm ir; Ratan Thiyam and performing the spectacle of the 
theatre of the root; Lai Haraoba festival of Manipur (16 lectures) 
The ‘other’ interventions: Binodini Dasi (performance in cinema), Manjula Padmanabhan’s Harvest 
and performance in/and the posthuman world; Heisnam Sabitri in Heisnam Kanhailal’s Draupadi 
(bodily performance), Swar Thounaojam and Bogey Systems (in English, Meiteilon, Kannada, 
and Tamil), and Mangai’s Frozen Fire and performing queer (10 lectures) 
 
Textbooks 
1. Aristotle. Poetics 
2. Schechner, Richard. Performance Studies and Performance Theory 
3. Adorno, Theodor, et al. Aesthetics and Politics 
4. Dharwadker, Aparna Bhargava. Theatres of Independence: Drama, Theory, and Urban 
Performances in India since 1947 
5. Bharata. Natya Shastra 
6. Fischer-Lichte, Erika, et al. The Routledge Introduction to Theatre and Performance Studies and 
The Transformative Power of Performance: A New Aesthetics 
7. Hollander, Julia. Indian Folk Theatres 
8. Bharucha, Rustom. Theatre and the World  
9. ---. The Politics of Cultural Practice  
10. ---. Terror and Performance 
11. --- and Paula Richman (eds.). Performing the Ramayana Tradition (forthcoming) 
12. Mukherjee, Tuntun. Staging Resistance: Plays by Women in Translation 
 
Reference Book  
1. Wiles, D, and C Dymkowski (eds.). The Cambridge Companion to Theatre History 
89 
 
2. Shivaprakash, H S. Incredible India: Traditional Theatres 
3. Lal, A. The Oxford Companion to Indian Theatre 
4. William Egginton. How the World Became a Stage: Presence, Theatricality, and the Question 
of Modernity 
5. Bhatia, Nandi.  Acts of Authority/Acts of Resistance: Theater and Politics in Colonial and 
Postcolonial India 
6. Varadpande, ML. The six-volume History of Indian Theatre 
7. Panja, Shormishtha, et al. Performing Shakespeare in India: Exploring Indianness, 
literatures and cultures  
8. Jenon, Jisha. The Performance of Nationalism 
9. --- and Milija Gluhovic (eds.). Performing the Secular 
10. Lal, Anand. The Oxford Companion to Indian Theatre 
11. Taylor, Diana. Performance. 
 
Online Course Material 
1. NPTEL web content on drama available at: https://nptel.ac.in/courses/109/106/109106054/ 
 
 
  
90 
 
Title Modern Indian Theatre Number HSL7XX 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG and PhD Type Elective  
Prerequisite None    
Objectives  
The instructor will:  
1. 1. Help students in exploring the intricacies of political and cultural histories of Indian theatre after 
the Indian Independence of 1947  
2. 2. Make students familiar with the significance of many modes, forms and practices of theatre in 
the political lives of the Indian nation 
3. 3. Help students to become familiar with some of the most significant events in the history of post-
independence India through the prism of theatre, playwriting and playgoing 
 
Learning Outcomes  
 The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. 1. Critically read playtexts and performance texts relevant for history-writing  
2. 2. Explore associations between public institutions, postcolonial national history, mass, avant-garde 
and agit-prop theatre culture and the ever-changing socio-politico-cultural dynamics 
3. 3. Develop acquaintance with contemporary scholarly writings on Indian theatre and politics   
 
Contents  
 
Post-Independence Statist Investment and Theatre Institutions: Legacies of IPTA & PWA, Nehruvian      
era and theatre policy in post -independence India, the formation of Sangeet Natak Akademi, 
National School of Drama, the language question, Theatre and Hindi public sphere, major directors 
and their legacy (3 lectures) 
Discourses around Theatre: The urban and the folk, politics of adaptation, Hindi theatre and regional  
theatre, politics of translation (3 lectures) 
Theatre in the long 1960s, Major Playwrights and their select plays : Mohan Rakesh ( Ashad ka Ek 
Din), Badal Sircar (Evam Indrajit), Vijay Tendulkar (Ghashiram Kotwal), Girish Karnad (Tuqlaq/The 
Fire and the Rain ), Mahesh Elkunchwar ( Garbo/Wada Chirebandi /Sonata/Aatmakatha), Komal 
Swaminathan ( Water! Water! ), H. Kanhailal ( Pebet), Satish Alekar ( Mahapoor/Begum Barve ), 
Chandrashekhar Kambar ( Jokumaraswami), K. N. Pa nikkar ( Karimkutty/The Lone Tusker ) (10 
lectures) 
Production Histories: Works of directors such as Ebrahim Alkazi, Shombhu Mitra, Utpal Dutt, Vijaya 
Mehta, B. V. Karanth, Usha Ganguli, Ratan Thiyam (4 lectures) 
In Another Medium : Adaptations in cinema (Mani Kaul’s Ashad ka Ek Din , Yukt Film Collective’s 
Ghashiram Kotwal, Satyadev Dubey’s Shantata! Court Chalu Aahe) (6 lectures) 
The Exploration of the Folk : Readings on Habib Tanvir, reading of a select playtext ( Charandas 
Chor/Bahadur Kalarin) (3 lectures) 
Political Theatre/Third Theatre : Utpal Dutt’s Towards a Revolutionary Theatre , Badal Sircar’s 
writings on Third Theatre, Safdar Hashmi and JANAM (6 lectures) 
Theatre after Globalization : social theories of globalization (Arjun Ap padurai et al.), theatre after 
globalization, multicultural theatre, Indian English theatre, select playtext (Mahesh Dattani’s 
Bravely Fought the Queen/Asif Currimbhoy’s Goa) (5 lectures) 
 
Textbooks 
1. 1. Lal, A., (ed.) (2009), Theatres of India: A Concise Companion, Oxford University Press.  
2. 2. Dharwadker, A., (2005), Theatres of Independence: Drama, Theory and Urban Performance in 
India since 1947, University of Iowa Press. 
3. 3. Bhatia, N., (ed.) (2009), Modern Indian Theatre: A Reader, Oxford University Press. 
4. Damodaran, S., (2017), The Radical Impulse: Music in the Tradition of the Indian People’s Theatre 
Association, Tulika.   
5. 4. Bharucha, R., (1983), Rehearsals of Revolution: The Political Theater of Bengal , University of 
Hawaii Press.  
6. 5. Bharucha, R., (2001), The Politics of Cultural Practice: Thinking through Theatre in an Age of 
Globalization, Oxford University Press. 
7. 6. Malini Bhattacharya’s IPTA articles in Journal of Arts and Ideas, Sangeet Natak, Anita Cherian’s 
article on Sangeet Natak Akademi reports in Third Frame will be provided by the instructor.  
8. Translated/original playtexts and writings of Rakesh, Sircar, Karnad, Tendulkar, Elkunchwar, 
Alekar, Kambar, Swaminathan, Kanhailal, Panikkar, Tanvir, Dattani, Currimbhoy, Dutt as published 
91 
 
by Oxford University Press, Seagull, Penguin and DVDs of film -texts will be provided by the 
instructor. 
 
Reference Book  
1. 1. Lal, A., (ed.) (2004), The Oxford Companion to Indian Theatre, Oxford University Press. 
2. 2. Dalmia, V., (2006), Poetics, Plays, and Performances: The Politics of Modern Indian Theatre , 
Oxford University Press.  
3. 3. Ghosh, A., (2012), A History of the Jana Natya Manch: Plays for the People, Sage. 
4. 4. Katyal, A., (2012), Habib Tanvir: Towards an Inclusive Theatre, Sage. 
5. 5. Kundu, M., (2016), So Near, Yet So Far: Badal Sircar’s Third Theatre, Oxford University Press.   
 
Online Course Material 
1. 1. Introduction to Modern Indian Drama by Dr. Kiran Keshavamurthy, IIT Guwahati, at 
https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc20_hs34/preview   
 
  
92 
 
Title Asian American Literature Number HSL7XXX 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0[3] 
Offered for UG and PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   
  
Objectives: 
The Instructor will: 
4. 1. Introduce students to the literary field of Asian American literature. 
5. 2. Look into three kinds of prose narratives, namely, immigration narratives, narratives of second-
generation identity construction, and narratives emphasizing global or postcolonial perspectives.  
6. 3. Demonstrate the dynamic relationship between Asian American  literature and the histories of 
Asians in the US. 
7. 4. Provide insights into settlement histories of the ethnic communities, legal discourses of 
immigration, multiracial hierarchy, multiculturalism, and neocolonialism in the US.  
  
Learning Outcomes: 
    The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand how the standard racial categorization of Asian Americans belies their vastly different 
languages, histories and traditions in the US. 
2. Identify the challenges that Asian Americans encou nter while undergoing the transition from 
“Asian” to “Asian American.” 
3. Explore how Asian American literature can function as a political and racial agency in critiquing 
America-centrism and racial inequality in the US. 
Contents: 
Introducing the genre: Emergence of the category “Asian American”, Arrival of early immigrants 
specifically from East Asia (China, Korea, and Japan) and the Philippines, The later addition of 
groups from Southeast Asia, South Asia, and West Asia, Asian Americans disowning immigr ants 
from other parts of Asia, Immigration policy of the US, Exclusion and deportation, Naturalization 
of Asians. (7 lectures) 
Close Textual Readings and Conversations : Maxine Hong Kingston (5 Lectures), Amy Tan (5 
Lectures), Bharati Mukherjee (5 Lectures) , Jhumpa Lahiri (5 Lectures), John Okada (5 Lectures), 
Chang-Rae Lee (5 Lectures), Le Thi Diem Thuy (5 Lectures) 
  
Textbooks 
1.    Maxine Hong Kingston’s The Woman Warrior 
 2.    Amy Tan’s The Joy Luck Club/ The Kitchen God’s Wife/ The Hundred Secret Senses 
 3.    Bharati Mukherjee’s Jasmine/ Wife/ The Middleman and Other Stories/ Holder of the World 
 4.    Jhumpa Lahiri’s The Namesake/ Unaccustomed Earth/ Interpreter of Maladies 
 5.    John Okada’s No-No Boy 
 6.    Chang-Rae Lee’s Native Speaker 
 7.    Le Thi Diem Thuy’s The Gangster We Are All Looking For 
  
Reference Books 
1.    Agnew, Vijay. Diaspora, Memory and Identity: A Search for Home, University of Toronto Press, 
2005. 
2.    Bhabha, Homi K. Nation and Narration. Routledge, 1990. 
3.    Bhabha, Homi K. The Location of Culture. Routledge, 1994. 
4.    Brah, Avtar. Cartographies of Diaspora: Contested Identities. Routledge, 1996. 
5.    Braziel, Jana E, and Anita Mannur. (Eds.) Theorizing Diaspora. Blackwell, 2003. 
6.    Chan, J. P., et al. editors. The Big aiiieeeee! An Anthology of Chinese American and Japanese 
American Literature. Meridan, 1991. 
7.    Cheung, King-kok. (Ed.) An Interethnic Companion to Asian American Literature , Cambridge 
University Press, 1997. 
  7.   Clifford, James. Routes: Travel and Translation in the Late Twentieth Century. Harvard 
        UP, 1997. 
8.    Cohen, Robin and Carolin Fischer. (Eds.) Routledge Handbook of Diaspora Studies . 
Routledge, 2019. 
93 
 
9.    Kim, Elaine H. Asian American Literature : An Introduction to the Writings and their 
Social Context. Temple University Press, 1982. 
10. Lal, Brij V., et al. editors. The Encyclopaedia of the Indian Diaspora. Editions Didier 
Millet, 2006. 
11. Leiwei Li, David. Imaging the Nation: Asian American Literature and Cultural Consent. 
Stanford University Press, 1998. 
12. Ling, Amy. Between Worlds: Women Writers of Chinese Ancestry. Pergamon, 1990. 
13. Radhakrishnan, R. Diasporic Mediations: Between Home and Location . University of 
Minnesota Press, 1996. 
14. Wong, Sau-Ling Cynthia. Reading Asian American Literature: From Necessity to 
Extravagance. Princeton University Press, 1993. 
  
Online Course Material 
         Dr. Aysha Iqbal Viswamohan, Contemporary Literature, Department of Humanities and                
Social Sciences, IIT Madras, Lectures 35 to 38.             
 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1y4NekgqulA&list=PLE61D1F6F620DDE0F&index=35  
 
  
94 
 
Title World Literature and Global Cinema  Number HSL7XX 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG Type Elective  
Prerequisite None    
Objectives  
 The instructor will:  
1. Help students to explore the intricacies of concepts such as world literature/ weltliteratur, 
national, transnational and/or global within the disciplines of literary and cinema studies  
2. Help students to become familiar with some of the most significant phenomena in the 
history of post-globalization cinema  
3. Make students familiar with the emergent categories such as slow cinema and discuss their 
efficacy as global concepts  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Map the trajectory from the national to the transnational conceptually, culturally and 
politically  
2. Explore the methodological paradigm shift that the rise of transnationalism entails in 
various humanities disciplines  
3. Develop acquaintance with contemporary research on transnationalism and cinema and 
consider the possibility of using transnationalism as a research method  
 
Contents  
 
Introducing world literature : Weltliteratur, the term borrowed from Goethe, the Franco Moretti 
intervention, literary mapping (10 lectures)   
World Literature and Its Complexities : Contemporary comparative literature dealing with the 
concept, works of Emily Apter and Pascale Casanova, world history of literature (10 lectures) 
Cinema and the Transnational: National cinema, the nation -state paradigm and its limitations, 
world cinema/transnational cinema and the interchangeability, the transnational waves (10 
lectures) 
Contemporary Categ ories: Transnational as method, slow cinema and its discontents, 
correspondences/filmed letters of contemporary filmmakers  (12 lectures) 
 
Textbooks 
 
1. Casanova, P., (2004), The World Republic of Letters, Harvard University Press.  
2. Goodwin, J., and Holbo, J., (eds.) (2011), Reading Graphs, Maps, Trees: Responses to 
Franco Moretti, Parlor Press.  
3. Vitali, V., and Willemen, P., (eds.) (2006), Theorising National Cinema , British Film 
Institute. 
4. Nagib, L., Perriam, C., and Dudrah, R., (eds.) (2006), Theorizing World Cinema, I. B. Tauris. 
5. Ezra, E., and Rowden, T., (eds.) (2005), Transnational Cinema: The Film Reader , 
Routledge.  
Reference Book  
Luca, T. D., and Jorge, N. B., (eds.) (2016), Slow Cinema, Edinburgh University Press.  
 
Online Course Material 
 https://www.cccb.org/en/exhibitions/file/the-complete-letters/38071  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
95 
 
Title Globalization and Culture Number HSL4xx  
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG Type Elective 
Prerequisite None     
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce students to varied definitions of globalization including its nature, dynamics and 
consequences as well as its multiple expressions in various periods in history.  
2. Examine the cultural dimensions of globalization through global institutions, global flows, and 
the circulation of commodities, ideas and practices. 
3. Explore the rise of religious, social, nationalist and populist movements across the world that 
challenge/supplement globalization. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand globalization as a historical and cultural phenomenon. 
2. Apply theories and concepts in the study of globalization towards the understanding of     
 specific cultural forms and their implications  for economic and scientific development.    
  
3. Critically engage with the proponents and dissidents of globalization and how they relate to our 
contemporary times. 
  
Contents 
When was Globalization: Globalization in History, Defining Globalization, Global-Local distinctions 
Globalization and Culture:  Neoliberalism, Cultural homogenization, Rise of common cosmopolitan 
cultures, McDonaldization 
Global Flows: Circulation of cultural forms, commodities and practices (music, fashion, gaming, 
language, tourism and popular culture, innovation, scientific collaboration etc.) 
Globalization and its Discontents: The rise of populism, consumer citizenship, local and slow food 
movements, Anti-globalization movements 
 
Textbooks 
1. Steger, M., (2017). Globalization: A very short introduction, Oxford University Press. 
2.   Barber, B., (1995). Jihad versus Mcworld, Times Books. 
3.   Stearns, P., Globalization in World History, Routledge. 
Reference Books 
1. Diamond, J., (1997), Guns, Germs and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies, RHUK. 
2. Appadurai, A., (1996), Modernity at Large: Cultural Dimensions of Globalization, 4th Edition, 
University of Minnesota Press.  
3. Stiglitz, J., (2002), Globalization and its Discontents. W. W. Norton and Company. 
Online Course Material 
1. SUNY Levin Institute, Globalization 101, http://www.globalization101.org/ 
2. Roy, A. G., Globalization and Culture, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Humanities and 
Social Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur,  
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/109/105/109105113/# 
 
 
  
96 
 
  Title Sociology of Science and Technology Number HSL7XX 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG Type Elective 
Prerequisite None     
Objectives 
1.   To help students conceptualize science and technology as embedded  in culture, politics and 
sociality and understand how technical knowledge is produced in society. 
2.   To help students explore the dynamic relationship between technology and society and 
discover how technology and society influence each other. 
3.   To make students conversant with important and new concepts in science and technology 
studies in social anthropology.  
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.   Comprehend technological progress as a social process 
2.   Find connections between science, technology and culture and think beyond simple binaries 
like ‘natural’ and ‘social’ sciences and ‘nature’ and ‘culture’. 
3.   Develop sensitivity towards an inclusive, sustainable use of technology and appreciate the 
significance of diversity in science studies 
Contents 
Introduction to the Sociology of Science  – Introduction to the subject, its founding concepts and 
traditions, methods of doing STS studies, History of Science and its philosophical traditions – 
logical positivism,  falsification and its critique (6 lectures) 
Methodology of Science and its social connections  - Structure of scientific revolutions, Ethics and 
ethos in science and deviance in practice of science, the Matthew Effect, and practicing ‘agnostic’ 
science, scientific inventions as cultural capital, social life of scientists. (10 lectures)  
 Social Construction of Science - Methods of representation in science, Ethnography of a laboratory, 
social construction of ‘realities’, social construction of na ture, Effect of social understanding of 
race and gender on production of scientific knowledge (10 lectures) 
STS as Social Science – Actor Network theory, Pasteurization and the world of non-humans, influence 
of science studies on social sciences, ecological understanding of the world, towards an inclusive 
understanding of the universe through STS. (10 lectures) 
Science and Technology in India - Science & Technology in Colonial India, Development of Indian 
Science, Science and Governance in India (6 lectures) 
  
Textbooks 
1.   Sismondo, S. (2010), An Introduction to Science and Technology Studies , 2nd Edition, Wiley 
Blackwell 
2.   Miller, D. et. al. edited (2012), Digital Anthropology, Berg. 
Reference Book 
1.   Felt U., Fouche, R. et. al. edited (2017), The Handbook of Science and Technology Studies , 
MIT Press 
Online Course Material 
1.  Mallick, S.  Science, Technology and Society, NPTEL Course Material, Department of HSS, 
IIT Guwahati, https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc17_hs26/preview    
2. Mishra, A.  Sociology of Science,  NPTEL Course Material, Department of HSS, Indian 
Institute of Technology Roorkee, https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc18_hs09/preview 
 
 
  
 
 
  
97 
 
Title  Culture, Art and Heritage Course No. HS 321 
Department HSS L-T-P[C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG Type Elective 
Pre-requisite None     
 
Objectives: The Instructor will: 
1.   Make the course largely interdisciplinary in nature and draw on literature, history, 
heritage, film, cultural studies and technology in India and the world 
2.   Help the students in understanding the complex role of history and culture in the shaping 
of our societies and identities 
3.   Explore a large canvas of genres, from Indian mythology, cinema, theatre, protected 
monuments, historical movements, folk dance and heritage. 
 
Learning Outcomes: The student is expected to 
1.  be exposed to the diverse traditions of India and the world 
2. develop an awareness and interest in indigenous traditions, heritage and technologies  
3. d evelop an understanding to create national consciousness as objects of literary and cultural 
analysis 
 
Contents 
Culture: Introduction: The concept of Culture, Historicity and Definitions, Culture and The Nation, Uses 
of History in Contemporary India, Identity and Culture, Popular Culture, Visual Culture 
Heritage and Conservation:  Built Heritage: Introduction, Structures and Conservation, Material and 
Architectures, Technology and Architecture, Restoration Architecture, Indian History and the role of 
Architecture and sculpture, Conservation and the role of Conservation Agencies, Natural Disasters and 
the role of Conservation. 
Intangible Heritage: Arts – Performing Arts (Music and Dance forms), Fine Arts (Painting), Literature 
centering around Myths, Legends and Epic Traditions, Oral Traditions, Traditional knowledge systems, 
Craftsmanship. 
 
Textbook 
Dalmia, V., and Sadana, R., (eds.) (2012), The Cambridge Companion to Modern Indian Culture , 
Cambridge University Press.  
 
Reference Book 
Kumar, K. J., (2000), Mass Communication in India, Jaico Publishing House. 
 
Online Course Material 
No specific material 
  
  
98 
 
 Course Title Gender and Society Course No. HSL7360 
Department HSS Structure (L-T-P-C) 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG and PhD Type Elective 
Pre-requisite None     
 Objectives 
1. To provide conceptual, sociological tools and skillset for cr itiquing binary and ahistorical  
conceptions of gender 
2.  To offer critical understanding of gender in a globalized, transnational world  
       3. To offer critical understanding of gender representations in media, visual cultures, and 
technology 
  
Learning Outcomes 
1.  Critique binary and ahistorical conceptions of gender in society 
2.  Understand interrelatedness of local, global, and transnational contexts in shaping of gender 
     Issues 
       3.   Accept of shared responsibility for solving local and global experiences of gender inequality  
  
Contents 
Gender as social construction: Key concepts; Introductions; Historical and social constructions of 
gender (3 lectures); Gender in Colonial History (6 lectures) 
Gender across geo -social scales - Politics of the body; Marriage and the Family; Gender and the 
Nation; Gender and Migration (6 lectures) 
Feminisms - History and types of feminist movements; Transnational Feminisms (6 lectures) 
Gender, Science, and Technology - History of gender in science and technology; Household 
technologies; Medical technologies; Communication technologies; Video Games (7 lectures)  
Imagining and Representing Gender - Gender in Literatur e and Culture (3 lectures); Postcolonial 
Studies; Gender and “modernity” (4 lectures); Normativity, Subversions, and Queer Studies (4 
lectures); Global Gender Politics (3 lectures) 
  
References 
1.  Enloe, C. (2014) Bananas, Beaches and Bases: Making Feminist Sense of International 
Politics, University of California Press, 2014 
2.  Fausto -Sterling, A. (2012) Sex / Gender: Biology in a Social World. Routledge, ISBN: 
9780415881463 
3.  Grewal, I. and Kaplan, C. (1994), Scattered Hegemonies: Postmodernity and 
Transnational Feminist Practices, University of Minnesota Press, ISBN 10: 
0816621381; ISBN 13: 9780816621385 
4.  Mohun, A. Ed., (2003), Gender and Technology: A Reader. Baltimore, MD: Johns 
Hopkins University Press, ISBN: 9780801872594 
5.  Sangari, K. and Vaid S., (1989), Recasting Women: Essays in Colonial History. 
Rutgers University Press ISBN-10: 0813515807; ISBN-13: 978-0813515809 
  
Online resources 
1.  Gender, Sexuality, and Society: https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/anthropology/21a-231j-
gender-sexuality-and- society-spring-2006/index.htm 
2.   Gender and Technology: https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/womens-and-gender-studies/wgs-
115-gender-and- technology-spring-2013/index.htm 
3.   Women’s and Ge nder Studies (list of all courses):  https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/womens-and-
gender-studies/ 
 
 
 
  
99 
 
 
Title Global Health  Number HSL 7XXX 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG and PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   
Objectives  
1. To introduce basic concepts of global health, and its relevance globally, with special reference 
to lower and middle-income countries (LMICs).  
2. To understand the various determinants of global health and policy options to address global 
public health issues.  
3. To examine how medical technologies should be used to improve health in low and middle 
income countries. 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Understand basic concepts of global health and its relevance in policy making. 
2. Analyse the role of various determinants on global health. 
3. Understand the role of medical technologies in improving health. 
Contents 
Principles, Measurements, and Health-Development links: The principles and goals of global health; 
Health determinants, measurements and status of health globally; The global burden of diseases; 
Health, education, equity and economy (8 lectures). 
Cross-Cutting Global Health Themes: Ethical and human rights concern in global health; Culture and 
health; Health systems (8 lectures). 
Burden of Disease: The environment and health; diseases of poverty, Nutrition and global health; 
Women’s health; Communicable and Non -communicable diseases; Mental health; injuries; ca se 
studies from South-East Asian countries (12 lectures). 
Global Health Institutions:  Role of WHO over the period of time; World Bank; UNICEF; USAID; 
European commissions (5 lectures). 
Role of Technologies in Improving Global Health:  Global health needs an d contribution of 
technologies; Frugal technologies; Implementation and innovation in technology for health; 
Disruptive technologies for healthcare in high income countries; Equity and universal coverage of 
technology (7 lectures).      
Text Books : 
1. Richard Skolnik (2020), Global Health 101 .Johns Bartlett Learnings. 
2. Birn, A. E., Pillay, Y., & Holtz, T. H. (2017). Textbook of global health. Oxford University 
Press. 
Reference Books/Reports: 
1. Detels, R. (Ed.). (2015). Oxford textbook of global public health (Vol. 2). Oxford Textbook. 
2. Glassman, A., & Temin, M. (2016). Millions saved: New cases of proven success in global 
health. Brookings Institution Press. 
3. Farmer, P., Kim, J. Y., Kleinman, A., & Basilico, M. (2013). Reimagining global health: an 
introduction (Vol. 26). Univ of California Press. 
4. Jamison, D. T., Summers, L. H., Alleyne, G., Arrow, K. J., Berkley, S., Binagwaho, A., ... & 
Yamey, G. (2013). Global health 2035: a world converging within a generation. The Lancet, 
382(9908), 1898-1955. 
5. Watkins, D. A., Yamey, G., Schäferhoff, M., Adeyi, O., Alleyne, G., Alwan, A., ... & Summers, 
L. H. (2018). Alma-Ata at 40 years: reflections from the Lancet Commission on Investing in 
Health. The Lancet, 392(10156), 1434-1460. 
6. Howitt, P., Darzi, A., Yang, G. Z., Ashrafian, H., Atun, R., Barlow, J., ... & Wilson, E. (2012). 
Technologies for global health. The Lancet, 380(9840), 507-535. 
Online Course Material 
1. Skolnik R. Essentials of Global Health, Yale University. 
https://www.coursera.org/learn/essentials-global-health  
 
 
  
100 
 
Title Health Policy, Systems, and Financing  Number HSL7XXX 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0[3] 
Offered for UG and PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   
Objectives  
1. Introduce critical and comparative understanding of the theory and practice of health policy with 
special focus on India. 
2. Facilitate students to understand components of health systems and its financing  mechanism. 
3. Introduce different national level secondary health data sets and its relevance in research and 
policy making. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. Realize the importance of health policy and how to define policy with special focus on India.  
2. Have a brief overview of the evolution of Indians health policy since Independence. 
3. Understand different components of health systems and its financing mechanism.  
4. Identify available national level secondary datasets in the health sector and its relevance in 
research and policy making.  
 
Contents  
Making Health Policy: The health policy framework: context, process, and actors; power and policy 
process; the state and private sector in health policy; agenda setting; government and policy 
process; policy implementation and evaluation (10 lectures).  
Evolution of India’s Health Policy: Bhore Committee-1946; National Health Policy-1983, 2002, and 
2017; Alma Atta Declaration -1978; National Rural Health Mission -2005; Ayushman Bharat 
Yojana-2018      (8 lectures). 
Understanding Health System: Service Delivery; health workforce; health information system; 
medical product; vaccines; and technology; Financing; leadership and governance (7 lectures).  
Healthcare financing: Health transition, diseases burden, and health expenditure pattern; 
collecting revenue, pooling risk, and purcha sing services; risk pooling mechanism; external 
assistance for health; improving health outcome (8 lectures).  
National Level Secondary Health Data Sets: National Sample Survey; National Family Health 
Survey; Census; Longitudinal Aging Study in India (8 lectures). 
 
Textbook  
1. Buse, K., Mays, N., & Walt, G. (2012). Making health policy. McGraw-hill education (UK). 
2. World Health Organization. (2007). Everybody's business -strengthening health systems to 
improve health outcomes: WHO's framework for action. 
3. Gottret, P., & Schieber, G. (2006). Health financing revisited: a practitioner's guide. The World 
Bank. 
 
Reference Books/ Re 
1. Blank, R., Burau, V., & Kuhlmann, E. (2017). Comparative health policy. Macmillan International 
Higher Education. 
2. Mills, A., Bennett, S., & Russell, S. (2001). The challenge of health sector reform: What must 
governments do? New York: St. 
3. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India (2017). National Health Policy - 
2017. New Delhi 
4. Government of India (1946) ‘Report of the Health Survey and Development Committee (Bhore 
Committee) IV. Manager of Publications; Delhi. 
 
Online Course Materials  
Emanuel E.J. Economics of Healthcare Delivery. University of Pennsylvania: 
https://www.who.int/health_financing/training/e-learning-course-on-health-financing-policy-for-
uhc/en/  
 
 
 
 
 
101 
 
 Title History and Philosophy of Science Number  HSL7410 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG Type Elective 
Prerequisite None     
Objectives 
1.  To introduce philosophical origins and foundations of science 
2.   To provide a deeper insight into the evolution of science and scientific methodology 
3.   To help students identifying the relationship between science, philosophy, and society  
Learning Outcomes 
1. Students will have a realistic and rational approach towards different conceptions of science 
2. The course may make students capable to analyze manifold philosophical issues associated 
with recent advancement of sciences 
3.  The course will nurture the skill to think analytically and critically 
Contents 
Historical and Philosophical Foundations of Science : Reciprocal Relationship between Science 
and Philosophy; Search for the Truth: History of Philosophy, Science, and Philosophy of 
Science; Scientific Methodology; Possibility of Knowledge; Laws of Nature; Limits of the 
Tools; Human Reason and Experience; Historic Interpolation (8 lectures) 
Major Philosophic (and Scientific) Concepts : Explanation; Causation; Evidence; Prediction; 
Probability; Determinism; Reduction; Generalization; Universals; Space and Time; 
Modeling and Simulation; Truth Value (12 lectures) 
Major Debates: Availability of Objectivity and Possibility of Subjectivity; Truth Discovery and 
Truth Creation; Theory Choice; The Turn to the Best Explanation; Underdetermination of 
Theories by Evidence; Bayesianism; Empiricism; Essentialism; Explanati on; Realism and 
Antirealism; Structure of Scientific Revolutions; Nature of Scientific Explanations; Truth 
and/or Consensus; Historical Approach; The Pragmatic View (12 lectures) 
Central Issues in Life Sciences: Biological Laws and Theories of Causation; T eleology; Theory 
of Natural Selection; Leaps and Randomness; Complexity, Indeterminacy, and 
Directionality; Biological Reductionism and Determinism; Darwin and Darwinism; Genetic 
Interventions; Eugenics; Enhancement; Nature of Scientific Discourses (10 lec tures) 
Reference Books 
1. Kuhn, T.S. (2012). The Structure of Scientific Revolutions , Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press. 
2. Kuhn, T.S. (1992). The Copernican Revolution, Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 
3. Salmon, M.H. et al. (1992). Introduction to the Philosophy of Science , New Jersey: 
Prentice-Hall. 
4. Psillos, S. & Curd, M. (2008). The Routledge Companion to Philosophy of Science , 
London: Routledge. 
5. Darwin, C. (1859). On the Origin of Species, London: Murray Press. 
6. Rosenberg, A & McShea, D.W. (2008). Philosophy of Biology, London: Routledge. 
7. Meijers, A. (2009). Philosophy of Technology and Engineering Sciences , Amsterdam: 
Elsevier. 
8. Dawkins, R. (2006). The Selfish Gene, 30th edition, London: Oxford University Press. 
9. Dawkins, R. (1996). The Blind Watchmaker, London: W.W. Norton. 
Online Course Material 
1.  Isaacs, I.  Philosophy of Science, 2020, Online Course, Oxford University, 
https://www.conted.ox.ac.uk/courses/philosophy-of-science-online 
  
 
 
 
  
102 
 
Title Foundations of Sustainability Number  HSL4040 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG and PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite None     
Objectives 
1.   To help students seriously considering responsible uses of science and technology 
2.   To motivate students to examine critically the potential uses of technological knowledge 
and artifacts 
3.   To provide acquaintance with normative commitments of an engineer/technologist  
Learning Outcomes 
1. Students shall be competent to assess the idea of sustainability with regard to possible 
applications of  technological skills 
2. Intellectual skills of critical thinking, unbiased assessment, and constructive decision making 
shall be nurtured 
3.  Sensitivity towards global concern for a sustainable future shall be promoted  
  
Contents 
Technological and Ethical Rationality : Thinking Like an Engineer; Normativity of Science and 
Technology; Technological Imperatives and Social Imperatives; Sciences, Values, and Value 
of Sciences. (6 lectures) 
The Idea of Sustainability: Emergence and Scope of Sustainability Science; Basic Principles of 
Sustainable Development; Report to the Club of Rome; UN Report; Concern for the Future; 
Evolutionary Roots of Environmental Problems (8 lectures) 
Plausible Applications of Technologies and Sustainability Con cerns: Recent Advancements in 
Technologies; Impacts on Life Forms and Ecology; Methods for and Approaches to 
Evaluating Susceptibility of Ecological Systems to Hazardous Chemicals; Global Pollution and 
Health Risks (8 lectures) 
Technology, Risks, and Ethic s: Perception of Risk; Social Benefits versus Technological Risk; 
Justifying Risk; Moral Acceptability of Risk; Rise of Risk and Decline of Politics; Role of 
International Cooperation (8 lectures) 
Uncertainty, Assessment and Precautionary Principle : Precau tionary Principle; Future 
Technologies; Ethics, Technological Development, and Uncertainty; Ethics in Technological 
Culture; Pragmatic Turn (12 lectures) 
Reference Books 
1.    Curry, P. (2011). Ecological Ethics, Cambridge: Polity Press. 
2.    Attfield, R. (2003). Environmental Ethics. Cambridge: Polity Press 
3.    Deane-Drummond, C.E. (2004). The Ethics of Nature. Oxford: Blackwell. 
4.    Meadows, H.W. et al. (1972). The Limits to Growth. Washington: Potomac Associates. 
Online Resources 
1.  United Nations.  Sustainable Development Goals, 2020, 
https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/ 
2. United Nations. Sustainable Development Knowledge Platform, 2020, 
https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org 
 
  
103 
 
Title Climate Change and Society Number HS 7xx 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG and PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite None     
Objectives: The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce students to scientific technological, historical, social, economic, political, cultural and 
ethical aspects of climate change within India and globally. 
2. Contextualize climate change in terms of global politics, technologies, policies, gender, aesthetics, 
activism, and the anthropocene. 
3.  Facilitate the student to understand trans -disciplinary trajectories and their role in t he complex 
interactions between climate, actors, scales, government, technology, civil society, cultural/social 
structures. 
 
Learning Outcomes: The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Critically analyze contemporary debates and perspectives on  climate change histories, policies, 
technologies, alternative voices and human responses. 
2.  Engage in respectful discussions, think creatively and critically to provide meaningful solutions to 
climate related issues. 
3. Reflect upon and acknowledge one’s moral and ethical obligations to the planet in the future. 
 
Contents 
Introduction to Climate Change (2 lectures) 
Global Genres and Positions Genres: Pastoral, Wilderness, Dwelling, Apocalypse (2 Lectures)  
Positions: Social Ecology, Spiritual Ecology, Scientific Conservation, Green Politics, Ecofeminism, 
Deep Ecology, Bioregionalism, Tinai, Chipko Movement (2 Lectures) 
Gender and environment: Is Climate Change gender neutral (research & perspectives), Climate 
change through the lens of intersectionality , climate change impact on gender in context of 
water, gender and food security, gender and land rights and, gender and health (6 lectures)  
Women Writing Nature: Rachel Carson, Terry Tempest Williams, Sunitha Narayan, Mahaswetha Devi 
and Ambai (5 lectures) 
Eco-Cinema: An Inconvenient Truth, Chasing the Ice, Paan, Godavari, Before the Flood, The Day 
After Tomorrow (5 lectures) 
Policy and Climate Change: Global and Indian perspectives and SDGs, climate smart agriculture, 
climate finance, climate change and co nflict/violence, climate change -induced migration 
(climate refugees) and displacement, adaptation to climate change, climate and environmental 
justice (8 lectures) 
Anthropocene or the Human Impact on Climate Change: Climate change and agriculture - a historical 
analysis in the Indian context, climate change and disasters, ocean and climate change (5 
lectures) 
Anthropocene and Climate Change Narratives: Amitav Ghosh – Great Derangement, Vandana Shiva 
– Water Wars, Cli -fi – Amitav Ghosh (Gun Island), Barbara Kingsolver (Flight Behaviour), 
SunithaNarain – Conflicts of Interest, Elizabeth Kolbert -The Sixth Extinction: AnUnnatural 
History, Donna Haraway – Tentacular Thinking:  Anthropocene, Capitolocene and Chthulucene 
(6 lectures)      
Text Book: 
A handbook with  all the study material will be given to the students. The course will also include a 
field trip. 
Reference Books 
1. Gadgil, M., and Guha, R., (1993), This Fissured Land: An Ecological History of India. UCLA.  
2.  Giddens, A., (2008), The Politics of Climate Change. Policy Network Paper. 
3. Nixon, Rob., (2011), Slow Violence and the Environmentalism of the Poor. Harvard University Press. 
4.  Bidwai, Praful., (2012), The Politics of Climate Change and the Global Crisis: Mortgaging Our Future, 
Orient BlackSwan. 
5.  Garrard, G., (2012). Ecocriticism: The New Ecocritical Idiom. Routledge. 
6.  Guha, R., (2014), Environmentalism: A Global History. Penguin Books. 
7.  Kolbert, E., (2014), The Sixth Extinction: An Unnatural History. Bloomsbury.  
8.  Dunlap, R., and Brulle, R.J., (2015), Climate Change and Society: Sociological Perspectives, OUP. 
104 
 
9. Scott, S., and Slovic, P (eds.) (2015), Numbers and Nerves: Information, Emotion, and Meaning in 
a World of Data. Oregon State UP, www.arithmeticofcompassion.org 
10.Ghosh, A., (2016), The Great Derangement: Climate Change and the Unthinkable. Penguin Books. 
11.Narain, S., (2017), Conflicts of Interest: My journey through India’s Green Movement,   
  Penguin. 
12. Rangarajan, S., (2018), Ecocriticism: Big Ideas and Practical Strategies. OrientBlackswan. 
13. Roy, S., (2018), We’re Doomed. Now What? Essays on War and Climate Change, Soho.  
14. Jaquette Ray, S., (2020), A Field Guide to Climate Anxiety. University of California Press.  
15. Discussion Papers, Research Reports and Policy Briefs from IPCC, The World Bank, UNDP. 
 
Online Course Material 
1.  Kipgen, G., Ecology and Society, Department of Humanities & Social Sciences Indian Institute of 
Technology, Guwahati. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/109103123 
2.  Climate Change Online  Learning, Open learning campus, The World Bank. 
https://olc.worldbank.org/content/climate-change-online-learning 
  
105 
 
 Title Politics of Water Governance Number HSL7420 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG and PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite None     
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide conceptual sociological critical understanding on water governance through global, 
national policies and geo -politics; and the multiple challenges faced by the societies to 
address water issues. 
2. Introduce students/young engineers to examine technologies through the lens of 
sustainability question and understand how technologies impacts the environment, 
industries and local communities’ livelihood through the case of water. 
3.  Facilitate the students to understand trans-disciplinary pathways to explore conceptual and 
empirical questions concerning water scarcity, technologies, water pollution, 
uncertainty/rights and access to water resources, and the cultural politics of water 
development. 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Interpret the theories and concepts underlying multiple levels of water governance, and 
contemporary global water debates around SDGs from a local/regional perspective.  
2. Reflect on the concepts of sustainability when developing technologies and analyze water 
nexus with livelihoods, technologies and pollution. 
3. By the end of the course, students/young engineers will be able to understand the politics 
and the socio -economics of water pol lution and the sustainability question of the 
technologies and its relation with water. 
Contents 
Water management across space and time: historical narrative (4 lectures)  
Major paradigm shifts in water governance: groundwater governance; politics and soci o-
economics of water pollution, political ecology of water (5 lectures) 
Water as wicked problem:  water laws/regulations/policy in India, Water conflicts in India and 
South-Asia trans-boundary water conflicts (5 lectures) 
Gender and water: engineering masculinities in water governance (3 lectures) 
Water rights and water justice: global politics of water grabbing; new spaces for water justice 
(4 lectures) 
Social scientific understanding of socio-technical systems: politics of dams; virtual water flow, 
cost-benefit analysis of technologies and the livelihoods surrounding water (5 lectures)  
Foucauldian discourse analyses:  new water standards and practices of multinational 
corporations (5 lectures) 
Water-climate change:  water-food security nexus, water -agriculture nexus, water -energy 
nexus (5 lectures) 
          Water centric SDGs: SDGs 2, 6, 14, India and UN (5 lectures) 
Textbook: A handbook with all the study material will be given to the students. The course will also 
include a field trip. 
Reference Books 
1. Mehta, L., (2005), The Politics and Poetics of Water: The Naturalisation of Scarcity of Western 
India, Orient Longman. 
2. Shah, T., (2009), Taming the Anarchy: Groundwater Governance in South Asia. Resource 
for Future, John Hopkins University Press. 
3. Zwarteveen. M.Z., Ahmed, S. and Gautam, S.R., (2012), Diverting the flow: Gender equity 
and water in South Asia, Zubaan. 
4. Sultana, F., and Loftus, A., (ed.) (2012), The Right to Water: Politics, Governance and Social 
Struggles, Routledge. 
5. Lankford, B., Bakker, K., Zeitoun, M., and Conway, D., (eds.) (2013), Water Security 
Principles, Perspectives and Practices, 1st Edition. Routledge. 
6. Naz, F. (2014), The Socio -cultural Context of Water: Study of a Gujarat Village , Orient 
Blackswan. 
106 
 
7. Shah, M., and Vijayshankar, P.S., (2016), Water: Growing Understanding, Emerging 
Perspectives (Readings on the Economy, Polity and Society), Orient BlackSwan. 
8. Zwarteveen, M., Kemerink-Seyoum, J. S., Kooy, M., Evers, J., Guerrero, T. A., Batubara, B., 
Wesselink, A., (2017), Engaging with the politics of water governance. Wires Water, 4(6). 
9. Boelens, R., and Perreault, Vos, J., (2018), Water Justice, Cambridge University Press. 
Online Course Material 
1.  Mukherjee, J., Water, Society and Sustainability.  Department of Humanities & Social 
Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/109/105/109105136/ 
  
 
  
107 
 
Title Aesthetics Number 32208 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG Type Elective 
Prerequisite None     
Objectives 
1.   Analysis of key philosophical attempts which address issues related to beauty and art  
2.   Explication of theoretical aspects related to the judgment of taste 
3.   Evaluation of issues in aesthetics related to design. 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Understand the nature and function of art with the help of theories in aesthetics 
2. Understand the nature and function of beauty 
3.  Identify the role of aesthetics in design 
Contents 
The Nature of Beauty and Art : Plato and Aristotle: The Symposium, an analysis of beauty; 
Imitation and Inspiration: the common thread in all art forms; Aesthetic Independence: 
Aristotle’s Poetics (10 lectures) 
Kritik der Urteilskraft  (Critique of Judgment ): Immanuel Kant, The Critique of Aesthetic 
Judgment: discussions on aesthetic experience and judgment; The ‘beautiful’: judgments 
on beauty and further interpretations. The ‘Sublime’: the power of reason over nature; 
‘Pleasure’: intentionality in enjoyment (8 lectures) 
Existentialist Perspectives: Nietzsche, the ‘genius’ and creativity; Life: the ‘absurd’ and human 
freedom in expressions of art; Existentialism and Art: the purpose of art in a meaningless 
world; Existentialist art and the ‘audience’: spectator’s vantage point (8 lectures) 
Feminist perspectives in A esthetics: Feminism: a critique of traditional Western ideologies on 
art; The Body: in art, science and philosophy; Aesthetic Categories: the feminine lens; 
Aesthetics: in everyday life; Post- Modernism and Aesthetics; Post-Modern Art (8 lectures) 
Aesthetics of Design: The Methodology, Functionality and Aesthetics: the importance of design; 
Factors in Design: culture, scope and use; Case Studies: industrial culture and design of 
products (8 lectures) 
Reference Books 
1. Aristotle. (1996) Poetics, Heath, Malcolm (Trans.), London: Penguin. 
2. Forsey, Jane. (2013). The Aesthetics of Design, New York: Oxford University Press. 
3. Gordon, Graham. (1997). Philosophy of the Arts: An Introduction to Aesthetics, London: 
Routledge. 
4. Kant, Immanuel. (2000). Critique of the Power of Judgment , trans. P. Guyer, and E. 
Matthews, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
5. Plato. (2001).Symposium, Benardete, Seth (Trans.), Chicago: The University of Chicago 
Press. 
6. Sheppard, Anne. (1987). Aesthetics: An Introduction to t he Philosophy of Art, Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. 
7. Davies, Stephen., Higgins, M. Kathleen., Hopkins, Robert ( et al ) (Eds). (2009). A 
Companion to Aesthetics, MA: Blackwell. 
 
Online Course Material 
1.  Grant, J.  Aesthetics and Philosophy of Art, 2020, Online Course, Oxford University, 
https://podcasts.ox.ac.uk/series/aesthetics-and-philosophy-art-lectures 
  
  
108 
 
Title Bioethics Number HSL4080 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for UG Type Elective 
Prerequisite None     
 Objectives 
The course will: 
1. Introduce and evaluate ethical issues concerning life 
2. Assess manifold implications of recent advancements in life sciences and technology  
3. Nurture the virtue of care for life and ecosystem 
  
Learning Outcomes 
Students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the significance of responsible use of biosciences and biotechnology  
2. Assess professional obligations 
3. Develop an attitude of stewardship towards all forms of life. 
 
Contents 
The Tools for Ethical Assessment : Origin and Significance of Bioethics; Major Ethical Theories; 
Dominant Approaches; International Declarations 
Bioethical Problems : Ethical Issues Concerning Human Life; The Right over Life; Life Saving 
Technologies at the  Beginning and End of Life; Life Enhancing Technologies; Reproductive 
Assistance; Bioengineering; Allocation of Resources; Drug Experimentation; Risk Assessment; 
Genetic Technology 
Professional Dilemmas : Care; Confidentiality; Truthfulness; Role of Conscie nce; Professional 
Competence; Compliance with Laws, Policies and Advanced Directives 
Animals and Biosphere: Grounds of Animal Justice; Animal Experimentations; Harvesting Organs; 
Genetically Modified Animals and crops; Ecological Balance; Species Conservat ion; Holistic 
Development 
 
Textbook 
1. Beauchamp, T.L & Childress, J.F. (2001). Principles of Biomedical Ethics , 5 th edition, Oxford 
University Press. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Singer, P. (2001). Practical Ethics, Cambridge University Press. 
2. Harris, J. (2001). Bioethics, , Oxford University Press. 
3. Kuhse, H. (Ed.) (2001). Unsanctifying Human Life, Wiley-Blackwell. 
4. Deanne-Drummond, C. (2004). The Ethics of Nature, Wiley-Blackwell. 
 
 
  
109 
 
 Title Consciousness Number HS729 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG and PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite None     
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1.    Help the student appreciate the problem of consciousness 
2.       Help the student realise how different approaches to the study of consciousness arise out of 
different philosophical assumptions 
 
Learning Outcomes 
       1- Being able to  understand how the problem of consciousness is significant in the overall task 
of explaining human cognitive capacity. 
       2- Being able to appreciate how insights from d ifferent approaches can be harnessed to build 
up an account of consciousness. 
 
Lecture Modules/Contents: 
The problem of Consciousness: Scientific and Philosophical Approaches to Consciousness  
Consciousness as a biological phenomenon: Need for unified research programme, multi level 
explanation. Explanation in the biological sciences. 
Major Theories of consciousness: Neural correlates, higher order thought theory, multiple drafts 
model, attention schema model. Illusionism about consciousness. 
Different Types of Consciousness: access consciousness and phenomenal consciousness, altered 
states of consciousness. 
Function of Consciousness: Consciousness as an epiphenomenon, global work space theory, 
panpsychism. 
Binding and phenomenal unity of consciousness: binding problem, cognitive mechanisms of 
phenomenal unity, neural mechanisms of binding. 
Evolution of consciousness, Self and Freewill. 
 
Reference Books: 
1.     Revonsuo A(2009) Inner Presence MIT Press. 
2.     Baars, B.J. (1997). In the Theater of Consciousness: The Workspace of the Mind . NY: Oxford 
University Press. 
3.     Metzinger, T. (Ed.) (1995). Conscious Experience. USA: Allen Press 
4.     Metzinger T(2009) The Ego Tunnell Basic Books 
  
  
  
  
110 
 
Title Principles of Psychology Number HSL3010 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG Type Elective 
Prerequisite None     
Objectives: The Instructor will: 
1. Providing knowledge about psychological mechanisms involved in human behavior and governing 
principles. 
2. Developing a basic understanding of Conscious state, emotional, cognitive and personality dynamics 
of human being and their behavior. 
3. Understanding individual and group human behavior in social context. 
 
Learning Outcomes: The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Theoretical understanding of psychological functioning. 
2. Experiential understanding of psychological explanation of human behavior.  
3. Developing a scientific approach to understand own and others behavior and improve upon it.  
 
Contents 
Introduction: Root, Field, Goal, Methods, Misconceptions about Psychology 
The Aware Mind: Consciousness, State of Consciousness 
The Feeling Mind: Feeling, Expressing and Interpreting Emotion 
The Thinking and Knowing Mind: Learning, Memory, Forgetting, Thinking, Intelligence 
The Individual Mind: Personality, Seeking Selfhood: Self -concept, Personal Control, Mastery and 
Growth 
The Connected Mind: Attitude, Attribution, Prejudice, Group Behavior 
Psychology Today: Stress: Good or Bad, Success: Intelligence or More 
 
Textbook 
1.  Cacioppo, J.T., and Freberg, L.A., (2013), Discovering Psychology: The science of human 
mind, Cengage Learning 
 
Reference Books 
1. Baron, A.R., (2001), Psychology, Pearson Education 
2. Ciccarelli, S., and Meyer, G.E., (2006), Psychology, Pearson Education 
 
Online Course Material 
1.  Kashyap, N., Human Behavior, 2020, Swayam, 
https://swayam.gov.in/nd1_noc20_hs28/preview 
  
  
111 
 
 Title Basics of Leadership Number HS411 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG Type Elective 
Prerequisite None     
Objectives: The Instructor will: 
1.Explain key differences and similarities between major leadership theories 
2. Explain the relationship between leaders and followers and effectiveness of leadership  
3. Combining theoretical and applicable principles to develop leadership implementation plan  
 
Learning Outcomes: The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Develop theoretical understanding for definitions, characteristics and skills of leadership  
2.  Develop skill to use leadership style suitable to situation and followers.  
3.  Realize one's potential and developing leadership skill 
 
Contents 
Introduction to Leadership: Definition and description, Old Psychology of Leadership, Current 
Psychology of Leadership, New Psychology of Leadership 
Leaders and Followers: Definition and type, Leader -Follower interaction for Effe ctive Leadership; 
Being in-group prototype, In-group champion, entrepreneur of identity, Inventor of identity 
Gender and Leadership: Masculine and Feminine style of Leadership, Stereotype and Attitude 
associated 
Power and Leadership: Source of Power, Type of Power, Ways to increase power, Influencing 
Tactics 
Ethics and Leadership: Definition and Description, Ethical Failure, Does ethical behavior pay, Is 
ethical reasoning and ethics training important 
Skills of Leadership: 8 Guidelines: Knowing -Doing Gap, 3  Rs: Reflecting (AIRing); Representing 
(Subcasing); Realizing (SMART and RITE), Avoiding Leadership Trap 
 
Textbook 
1.  Lussier, R.N., and Achua, C.F., (2016), Leadership: Theory, application and skill , 6th Ed., 
Cengage Learning, USA: Boston 
 
Reference Books 
1. Haslm, A.S., and Reucher, S.D., (2011), The new psychology of leadership: Identity, 
influence and power, Psychology Press, USA: NY 
2. Keohane, N.O., (2012), Thinking about leadership , Princeton University Press,  USA: New 
Jersey 
4.  Odom, L., (2010), Leadership ethics: Is doing the right thing enough , Xlibris Corporation, 
USA 
 
Online Course Material 
1.   IIT Kharagpur, 2009, Leadership, NPTEL, Leadership, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/122105021/ 
  
  
112 
 
Title Life and Professional Skill Development Number 32205 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG Type Elective 
Prerequisite None     
Objectives: The Instructor will: 
1. Sensitizing towards the importance of individual's strengths and virtues for having satisfying and 
successful personal and professional life. 
2. Theoretical understanding of Positive Psychology Approach. 
  
Learning Outcomes: The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Learning techniques for awareness, improvement and development of strength and skills.  
2. Developing synthesis of abilities to think like a professional, perform like a professional and to think 
and act in a responsible and ethical manner that integrates across all three domains.  
 
Contents 
Individual Difference:  Philosophical Basis, Cognition, Personality, Attitude,  Attribution,  
Socialization 
Life Skills:  Self Awareness, Creative and Critical Thinking,  Problem Solving,  Decision Making,  
Emotional Intelligence,  Assertiveness,  Stress Management 
Professional Skills:  Leadership, Communicatio n,  Planning,  Organizing,  Supervision and 
Management,  Teamwork,  Delegation,  Ethical Practices 
 
Textbook No ready textbook is available, appropriate material will be provided.  
 
Reference Books 
1. Francis, P.S.J., (2012), Soft skill and professional communication, Tata McGraw-Hill New Delhi 
2. Kumar, E. S., Sreehari, P., and Savithri, J., (2011), Communication  Skills and Soft Skills:  An 
Integrated Approach, Dorling Kindersley Pvt.  Ltd.  Pearson Education New Delhi 
3. Manoharan, P. K., (2008), Education and Personality Development ,  APH Publishing Corporation 
New Delhi 
4. Volkman, M.K., (2005), Life skill: Improve the quality of your life with metapsychology , Loving 
healing Press USA 
 
Online Course Material 
1.Mishra, B., Soft Skill, Swayam, https://swayam.gov.in/nd1_noc19_hs33/preview 
 
  
 
 
 
  
113 
 
Title Positive Psychology and Well-being Number HSL4060 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG Type Elective 
Prerequisite None     
Objectives: The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce the field of Positive Psychology by covering major themes 
2.  Explain scientific findings and practical implications 
3.  Develop and understanding and appreciation of positive aspect of human psyche  
Learning Outcomes: The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Get a sense of inner working of self 
2.  Appreciate the application of this knowledge in the field of education, workplace, personal 
life, and policy 
3.  Develop understanding to use the practical application to live fuller and meaningful life  
Contents 
Development of science of Positive Psychology : Is there a negative Psychology; History and 
introduction of field; Reasons for the growth of the field, Application of Positive Psychology in 
the practice of education and health 
Character strength and virtues:  Identification and assessment; Wisdom as master virtue, Post -
traumatic growth of strength and virtues 
Flow and Mindfulness: Living in present; Definition and differences; Applications 
Positive emotions: Positivity; Benefits and burdens of positivity; Application 
Happiness: Definition and determinants; PERMA-pursuing happiness; Money and happiness; Meaning 
and happiness, Eastern and Western perspective 
Well-being and flourishing:  Types and paradox; Social and digital well -being; Living well vs. 
Flourishing: Perspectives and pillars, Cultural perspective 
 
Textbook 
1.  Snyder, Lopez, Edwards, and M arques (Eds.) (2017), Oxford Book of Positive Psychology, 
Oxford Press 
 
Reference Books 
1. Lopez, Pedrotti, and Snyder, (2019), Positive Psychology – The scientific and practical exploration 
of human strengths, Sage Publication, International Edition 
2. Compton, and Hoffman, (2019), Positive Psychology – The science of happiness and flourishing, 
Sage Publications 
3. Gilbert, D., (2006), Stumbling on happiness, Vintage Books 
 
Online Course Material 
1.  Singh, R., Positive Psychology, July 2019, SWAYAM course, 
https://swayam.gov.in/nd1_noc19_hs63/preview 
2. Sharma, A.K. , Visions of Happiness and Perfect Society, 2012, NPTEL cour se, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/109/104/109104068/ 
 
 
 
  
114 
 
 Title Consumer Culture and Commodities Number HS 7xx 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG and PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite None     
Objectives: The Instructor will: 
1. Facilitate students to understand and critically investigate consumption in contemporary, urban 
life. 
2. Acquaint students with theories that will help them locate consumption vis -à-vis sociocultural 
contexts, identities, and markets. 
3. Elaborate key areas of consumption such as shopping spaces and experiences, domesticity, 
advertising, tourism and fashion using examples from the Indian context. 
Learning Outcomes: The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand major concepts and theories in consumption and consumer culture.  
2. Investigate processes of consumption empirically in various aspects of contemporary life.  
3. Understand key political and moral concerns around consumption regarding ecology, 
sustainability, and socio-economic class. 
 
Contents 
Understanding Consumption: Theories of consumption, mass consumption, commodity culture, 
consumerism (Daniel Miller, Clifford Geertz, Fredric Jameson) 
Objects, Materials and Social Contexts: Theories of matter and materiality, thing theory, study of 
objects (Bill Brown, Mary Douglas, Arjun Appadurai, Jean Baudrillard, Tim Ingold)  
Media and Consumerism: Advertising, consu mption, liberalization, middle -class lifestyles, 
conspicuous consumption in the Indian context (William Mazzarella, Leela Fernandes, Osella 
and Osella, Ritty Lukose) 
 
Textbooks 
1. Sassatelli, R., (2007), Consumer culture: History, theory and politics, Sage. 
2. Miller, D., (1987), Material Culture and Mass Consumption. 1st Edition, Wiley-Blackwell. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Douglas, M. and Isherwood,B., (1996),  The World of Goods: Towards an Anthropology of 
Consumption, Routledge. 
2. Corrigan, P., (1997), The Sociology of Consumption, Sage. 
3. Appadurai, A., (1986), The Social Life of Things: Commodities in Cultural Perspective , 1 st 
Edition, Cambridge University Press. 
4. Falk, P, and Campbell, C., (eds.). (1997), The Shopping Experience, Sage. 
 
Online Course Material 
1. https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/social-sciences/consumer-culture 
2. https://www.coursera.org/learn/market-power 
 
 
  
115 
 
Title Civilizations, Cultures, and 
Technologies 
Number DHL6XX0 
Department IDRP: DH L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Sc. DH First Year only; 
B.Tech Electives; B.Tech Minor 
in DH 
Type Compulsory for DH and 
Elective for all others 
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives 
 
1. This course introduces students to important historical and sociocultural processes that 
have crafted technologies over time and across civilizations. 
2. Recognize how technological developments are related to socio -cultural values and 
practices and understand the roots of current technological society(ies) 
 
Learning Outcomes 
 
1. Students will be able to appreciate that technology is not an isolated, literate 
enterprise, it rather produces structures, machines, processes, systems that impact 
and inflect societies and civilizations 
 
Contents 
1. What is Technology - History of Civilizations and role of technology (Classical and 
2. Early Modern Philosophy); Narrative(s) of Progress; Industrial Revolution(s); 
Industry and Innovation; Culture of Invention 
3. Revolution, Enlightenment and the Rise of Modern Science 
4. Social Construction of  Technology - Colonial Technology (Race, Gender, Sciences and 
Technology); 
5. Communication, Transportation and the changing world 
6. Diffusion of Technologies and transfer of technology globally 
7. The Development of the Computer Industry; Rise of the Internet and  Digital 
Society(ies) 
8. Industrialization, Commodification and the Environment; Biotechnology 
9. Future of Science and Technology in the society and their changing relationship  
 
Textbook 
 
1. Pacey, Arnold. Technology in World Civilization, 4th ed. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001. 
2. Volti, Rudi, Society and Technological Change, 4th ed. New York: Worth Publishers, 2001 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Digital Humanities Seminar Video Archive of the Open University, UK,  
http://www.open.ac.uk/arts/research/digital-humanities/videos 
 
 
 
  
116 
 
Title Images, Imaginations, and 
Digital Cultures 
Number DHL6XX0 
Department IDRP: DH L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Sc., M.Tech, B.Tech Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   
Objectives 
 
1. To familiarise students with the process of seeing as a social construct to explore the ways 
we produce, identify, understand, and consume images by studying visual materials from 
different historical and cultural milieu 
2. To introduce students to how photography and images across time and space change 
visual discourse and people’s lives 
3. By contextualising everyday visual culture within larger social debates around power, 
politics, identity and resistance, this course aims to create a consciousness about the 
communicative power of visual images, and to equip students with interpretive tools for the 
evaluation of images. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Students will be able to develop a sociological imagination of visual cultures and its impact on 
society 
2. Students will be able to assemble a multi -perspective analysis of a given sociocultural issue 
related to images against local, global, international, and intercultural background 
3. Map historical photographic concepts to current digital references. 
Content 
1. Visual Cultures and the Process of ‘Seeing’: Subject -Object debate; The Spectacles of 
Modernity; Power, Knowledge and the Gaze (Imaging the ‘Other’) [10 Lectures] 
2. Images as Performative Space [8 Lectures] 
3. Visual Culture and Resistance - Representations, Culture, Media, and Markets [6 Lectures] 
4. Digital media and Global Image (Visual Culture of Everyday Life) [10 Lectures]  
5. Netnography/ Digital ethnography [8 Lectures] 
References Books 
1. Karlekar, Malavika., (2013), Visual Histories: Photography in the Popular 
Imagination, Oxford University Press 
2. Chaudhary, Zahid R., (2012), Afterimage of Empire: Photography in Nineteenth - Century 
India, University of Minnesota Press 
3. Benjamin, Walter. 1936 (2008). The Age of Art in the Age of Mechanical 
Reproduction. London: Penguin. 
4. Nakamura, Lisa. 2008. Digitizing Race: Visual Cultures of the Internet. Minneapolis: University 
of Minnesota Press. 
 
  
117 
 
Title Fundamentals of Digital Humanities Number DHL7010 
Department IDRP-DH L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. (Cr>=100); M.Sc. (Cr >=30); 
M.Tech. (Cr.>0); Ph.D. (Cr.>0) 
Type Elective  
Prerequisite  None     
  
Objectives 
1. Introduce and explore a broad spectrum of perspectives on the Digital Humanities 
2. Develop familiarity with a range of Digital Humanities projects, as well as the ability to 
evaluate the tools and methods involved in creating and analysing those projects  
3. Critical and reflexive use of digital tools, technologies, and spaces by understanding that 
all technologies are complex and socially situated, through which humans make meaning 
  
Learning Outcomes  
1. Appreciate and critically discuss Digital Humanities projects in light of current methods 
and theoretical approaches to the field 
2. Explain how Digital Humanities methods and practices are applied in different disciplines 
3. Skillset to plan, develop, and evaluate a Digital Humanities research project 
  
Fractal Course Contents  
  
Fractal 1: Digital Humanities: Emerging Contours (DHL7011) 
  
Introduction: What is Digital Humanities, Evolution of classical disciplines into Digital Humanities  
Digital Cultural Heritage; Conceptualising DH projects; Interdisciplinary style of proposal writing [4 
Lectures]  
Computational Humanities [3 Lectures]  
Digital Embodiment: Embodied Identities in Digital Society; Bias and Privilege – Marginalised 
Histories; Cyborgs, Gender, Space, and Place in Digital Societies [4 Lectures]  
Literature and Technology, Text Analysis, Data Visualisation [3 Lectures]  
  
Hands-on Exercises 
1. Identifying DH projects from traditional projects: Concrete examples and a range of 
approaches to DH from the traditional disciplines.  
2. Digital Humanities Project Critiques: Exploring the project goals, what type of data it used, 
how that data was found and/or transformed, what technologies were used, and why.  
 
References Books 
1. Gere, C., (2008), Digital Culture, 2nd Edition, London: Reaktion Books Limited  
2. Bentkowska-Kafel, A., Cashen, T., and Gardiner, H. (Eds.) (2009), Digital Visual Culture: 
Theory and Practice, Bristol and Chicago: Intellect Books 
3. Karaganis, J. (Ed.), (2007), Structures of Participation in Digital Culture, Social Science 
Research Council, Columbia University Press 
 
Online-course material 
Digital Humanities Seminar Video Archive of the Open University, UK, 
http://www.open.ac.uk/arts/research/digital-humanities/videos 
 
Fractal 2: Data and Knowledge representations (DHL7012) 
 
Introduction: Data Sources, Transcribing (Multimedia data), Conversation, Discourse Analysis [7 
lectures] 
Knowledge Engineering: Ontological engineering, Representation of Ontologies, Common Logic, 
RDFS, Web Ontology Language (OWL), Topic Maps, Multimedia Web Ontology La nguage, 
Applications [ 7 Lectures] 
  
Hands-on Exercises 
118 
 
1. Ethnographic data collection and analysis: A case study 
2. Ontology formation from Multimedia Data: A case study 
 
References Books 
1. Christopher Joseph Jenks (2011), Transcribing Talk and Interaction: Issues in the 
Representation of Communication Data, John Benjamins Publishing Company. 
2. Russel, S. & Norvig, P., (2009), Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, Pearson Education 
3. S. Chaudhury, A. Mallik, and H. Ghogh (2016), Multimedia Ontology Represen tation and 
Applications, CRC Press. 
Online-Course Materials 
1. Knowledge Representation and Reasoning  
http://videolectures.net/ssll09_pagnucco_krr/ 
http://videolectures.net/eswc2018_rudolph_knowledge_representation/ 
 
Fractal 3: Digital Archives (DHL7013) 
  
Digital memory, Methods of archiving, Theorizing the archive, database [6 lectures]  
Exhibition, installation, audio-visual essays [4 lectures]  
Aesthetics of recreation/ Digital aesthetics, Digital Art [4 lectures]  
  
References Books 
1. Ernst, W., (2013), Digital Memory and the Archive, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota 
Press  
2. Grau, O., Coones, W., and Ruhse, V. (Eds.) (2017), Museum and Archive on the Move: 
Changing Cultural Institutions in the Digital Era, Berlin and Boston: De Gruyter  
 
Online-course material 
1. https://indiancine.ma/  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
119 
 
Title New Media Studies Number DHL5XX0 
Department IDRP: DH L-T-P [C] 3–0–2 [4] 
Offered for All M. Tech and PhD students 
<Shall also be considered for 
B.Tech Students> 
Type M.Sc. DH First Year 
Compulsory, Elective for all 
others 
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives 
1. Exploring the various possibilities offered by New Media and their impact on social, political 
and cultural domains 
2. Understanding concepts such as piracy, rights and the digital commons 
3. Understanding the implications of New Media and the digital image for the public lives in India 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. A sustained interest in new media and its global politics 
2. Informed acquaintance with the network society 
3. A South Asian/Indian intervention into the field 
 
Contents 
New Media and its aftermath, public domain and the digital commons, copyright and IP, piracy, 
online streaming and ownership/authorship debates, network and cyber-culture, videogames, 
digital image and social media, media lab as research space, New Media in Indian politics  
 
Reference Books 
1. Athique, A, Parthasarathi, V., and Srinivas, S.V., (Eds.) (2018), The Indian Media Economy , 
New Delhi: Oxford University Press. 
2. Sundaram, R., (2010), Pirate Modernity: Media Urbanism in Delhi, New Delhi: Routledge. 
3. Manovich, L., (2016), Instagram and Contemporary Image, Web. 
4. Manovich, L., (2001), The Language of New Media, Cambridge: MIT Press. 
 
 
lf Learning Material 
1. https://www.media.mit.edu/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
120 
 
Title Digital Cinema Number DHL5XX0 
Department IDRP: DH L-T-P [C] 3–0–2 [4] 
Offered for All M. Tech and PhD students 
<Shall also be considered for 
B.Tech Students> 
Type M.Sc. DH First Year 
Compulsory, Elective for all 
others 
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives 
1. Exploring the various democratic possibilities offered by digital cinema 
2. Understanding the digital in the domain of exhibition and spectatorship 
3. Understanding the digital platforms for cinema-visual art collaboration 
 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. A sustained interest in digital cinema, its liberating principles and politics  
2. Informed acquaintance with the experimental cinema-visual art alliance in the days of 
the digital 
3. The implications of the digital for non-industrial film forms 
 
Contents 
The end/future of celluloid, post -cinema, digital cinema and durational principles, streaming 
platforms and authorship debates, digital film archives and databases, experimental cinema, 
visual art, and the digital, new exhibition spaces, screen dynamics and hi gh definition image, 
emergent forms of spectatorship 
 
Reference Books 
1. Koch, G., Pantenburg, V., and Rothohler, S., (Eds.) (2012), Screen Dynamics: 
Mapping the Borders of Cinema, Vienna: Austrian Film Museum. 
2. Torlasco, D., (2013), The Heretical Archive: Digital Memory at the End of Film , 
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 
3. Denson, S., and Leyda, J., (2016), Post-Cinema: Theorizing 21 st-Century Film , Web: 
Reframe Books. 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. https://www.media.mit.edu/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
121 
 
Title Network Cultures Number HSL 7xx 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG and PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce students to the field of network cultures that revolves around the interaction between 
new forms of networked media technologies, its users and the developing discourses  
2. Provide a critical understanding regarding the artistic, political and technical facets of the 
internet and other emergent media that will help students better understand the contemporary 
paradigms in the  field of network studies. 
3. Allow students to develop a self reflexive understanding and a critical approach to web-based 
and computational cultures, through exposure to divergent perspectives on data, governance 
and society especially in the historical, social, cultural and economic context of India. 
 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. To understand the broad field of network cultures as a strategic instrument to diagnose political 
and aesthetic implications of user-driven computer mediated communication. 
2. Interpret the theories and concepts underlying the technical, economic, social aspects of the 
network, and put it in dialogue with its everyday manifestations 
3. By the end of the course, students will develop the capacity to create rational frameworks for the 
varied contexts of internet mediated communication: including design, activism, art, philosophy, 
political theory, and urban studies  
  
Contents 
Historical background: Society, Modern Science, and Technology (4 lectures)  Tracing a co ncise 
history of the development and teleology of network studies and network cultures by 
acknowledging relevant contributions from theorists including   Aristotle, Kuhn, Fleck, 
Jassanof  
Hierarchies v/s Networks (4 lectures) Locating the complex dynamics, similarities and differences 
between hierarchies and networks through   works of scholars from diverse disciplines 
and  locations such as   Niall Feguson, Tim Berners Lee, David Berry, Alexander Galloway, 
and Sandeep Mertia  
The Social, The Technological and its Overlaps (8 lectures)  Situating the epistemic and ontological 
origins of networks in its social and technical contexts including the overlaps. Readings and 
case studies from   Langdon Winner, Claude S. Fisher, David, J. Hess, Tarleton Gillespie, 
Alessandro Ludovico, Geert Lovink, and Gyan Prakash,  
Networks and Networlds (4 lectures) Differentiating between networks and 
networlds;Communication paradigms, the power frameworks and counter power 
potentialities that are espoused in such networks and networlds. Readings and Case studies 
from Castells, Apprich, Dragona, Lovink, Wüst. Brevini, Pasquale and Mbembe  
Algorithms, Big Data and Surveillance Capitalism in the Networked Age (8 lectures) Analyzing 
Big Data, Open Data Algorithmic biases and Surveillance Capitalism within network societies. 
Readings and case studies from Gitelman, Boyd, Zuboff, Beer, Manovich, Driscoll and Walker)  
 
The Gender of Networks (4 lectures)  Understanding the linkages, interactions and procesess 
through which gendered bodie s and networks interact. Readings from Wajcman, Haraway, 
Cupples, and Bay 
Networks and New Becomings (6 lectures)  Analyzing the anomalous objects and processes in 
digitally networked cultures and the new possibilities and challenges that they engender, 
especially in a post Covid 19 landscape. Readings and case studies from Parrika,   Loes 
Bogers,  Letizia Chiappini, Duncan J. Watts & Steven H. Strogatz , Stefania Milan, Emiliano 
Treré and Silvia Masiero, and The Alan Turing InstituteThe Analog lives of Networked 
Digital Data in India (4 lectures)  Afterlives of data and computational cultures in the context of 
the Global South, with a specific focus on India. Readings and Case studies Pankaj Sekhsaria, 
Navin Thayill, the Institute of Network Cultures and Akash Solanki  
 
Textbook:  
122 
 
A curated course artifact with all the study material will be given to the students.  
 
Reference Books 
Galloway, A. R. (2006). Protocol: how control exists after decentralization . The MIT Press.  
Lovink, G. (2013). Networks without a cause: a critique of social media . Polity Press.  
Kitchin, R. (2021). Data lives: how data are made and shape our world. Bristol University Press.  
 
Online Material  
 https://networkcultures.org/publications/ 
 
  
123 
 
Title Masculinities in/and the Global 
South 
Number HSL 7xx 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG and PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   
Objectives   
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce students to  the societal structures and expectations through which the gendered 
individual emerges as an integrated physiological, psychological, and socio -political being 
2. Locate how the postcolonial nation state and masculine behaviours intersect in the Global South 
through in-depth case studies and analysis of policy reports as well as cultural artifacts related 
to current environments, health, family, relationships,  and aging  
3. Critically examine masculine expectations and behaviors in contemporary society, with a specific 
focus on India 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. To understand the broad field of Masculinity Studies and the construction of masculinities in 
sports, family, work and other social relationships 
2. Examine th e concepts underlying heteropatriarchal assumptions about masculinity and the 
various gendered experiences of the male body based in citizenship, caste,   class, occupation, 
physical ability and sexuality 
3. By the end of the course, students will develop the capacity to understand and develop rational 
frameworks for the varied contexts of hegemonic, hyper and   hypo-masculinities  in diverse social 
and professional contexts 
 
Contents 
The Phenomenology and Materiality of Bodies  (6 lectures) : Introduction to power, essence, 
embodiment and volatility in relation to gendered bodies through the works of Merleau-Ponty, 
Foucault,  Irigaray, Cixous, de Beauvoir, Fuss and Grosz 
Gender and Performativity (8 lectures):  Locating through the works of Butler, Halberstam, Bordo 
and Douglas how gendered behaviour and sexual identity differ, intersect and create 
dissonances based within the specificities of our geographical and social positions  
Bodies, Spaces and Borders (6 lectures):  Examine how gendered bodies are performed  and 
determined within the determining variables of spatial contexts and bordered zones. 
Readings from Sara Ahmed, Mohanty, Hooper, De Certeau, Debord, Massey and Soja 
Men, manhood and masculinities  (12 lectures): Tracing the historical and social construc tions of 
hegemonic, hypo and hypermasculinities in various local, regional and national contexts. 
Readings from Connell, Kimmel, Messerschimdt, Dasgupta, Gokulsingh, Kabesh, McRuer, 
Krishnaswamy, Sinha and Puar 
Mediations, Violence and Manhood (6 lectures) : Examining the intrinsic role of violence in the 
construction of dominant masculinities especially in postcolonial spaces and the role of the 
media in legitimizing such constructions of manhood. Readings and viewings from Klaus 
Thewleit, Jackson Katz,   Eric Anderson, Sanjay Srivastava, Mike Donaldson, Jon Mckenzie 
and others 
Digital masculinities and its Discontents (4 lectures): Deciphering how digital spaces configure new 
forms of masculinities and its effects on both online and offline spaces. Readings from Roy, 
Currier, Garlick, Chowdhury and others. 
 
Textbook: 
 A curated course artifact with all the study material will be given to the students.  
Additional Materials: 
1. Fuss, Essentially Speaking  
2. Grosz, Volatile Bodies  
3. Hatty, Masculinities, Violence and Culture  
4. Hooper, Manly State  
5. Jarvis, The Male Body at War  
6. Kimmel, Manhood in America  
7. Lingis, Foreign Bodies  
8. McKenzie, Perform or Else  
9. Theweleit, Male Fantasies (Vol.2)  
124 
 
 
Reference Books 
Connell, R. W. (2009). Masculinities. Polity Press.  
Dasgupta, R. K. (2014). Masculinity and its challenges in India: essays on changing perceptions.   
Foucault, M. (2020). The history of sexuality. Penguin Classics.  
Halberstam, J. (2018). Female masculinity. Duke University Press.  
Kimmel, M. (2018). Guyland the perilous world where boys become men. Harper Perennial.   
McKenzie, J. (2008). Perform or else: from discipline to performance. Routledge.  
Mohanty, C. T. (2007). Feminism without borders: decolonizing theory, practicing solidarity. P oint 
Par Point.  
Sinha, M. (1997). Colonial masculinity: the "manly Englishman" and the "effeminate Bengali" in the 
late nineteenth century. Kali for Women.  
 
Online Material  
TillotomaProductions.(2015).-Mardistan/Macholand. 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tSrGuXTEHsk.  
Media Education Foundation. (1999). Tough Guise. USA.  
 
 
 
  
125 
 
Title Energy Humanities Number HSL7XX 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG and PhD Type Elective  
Prerequisite None    
 
Objectives  
 The Instructor will:  
1. Help students in exploring the intricacies of Energy Humanities and the social, political, and 
historical contexts which engender this interdisciplinary field 
2. Make students familiar with the many modes, forms and practices from the humanities, social 
sciences a nd natural sciences that constitute the ontological and methodological 
underpinnings of the Energy Humanities 
3. Help students to become familiar with some of the most significant events and issues that 
frame the key debates in the Energy Humanities 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Critically read theoretical texts and public policy artifacts that are relevant to the framing of 
discourses of Energy Humanities  
2. Understand associations between public institutions, national cultures, consumerism, and 
capitalist socio-politico-cultural dynamics that influence imaginaries of energy in contemporary 
culture 
3. Develop acquaintance with contemporary scholarly writings on Energy Humanities 
 
Contents  
The Rise of Energy Humanities  (8 lectures) The emergence of “Energy humanities” as a rapidly 
emerging field of scholarship that overcomes traditional boundaries between the humanities 
and natural sciences and between academic and applied research; highlighting the essential 
contributions, insights and methods that the humanities can make to areas of study and 
analysis that were once limited and siloed within the natural sciences  
Discourses around Energy Humanities  (8 Lectures): Role of key sites of research on energy and 
culture—Comenius University in Bratislava (Slovakia), the Center for Energy and 
Environmental Research in the Human Sciences (CENHS) at Rice University and the 
Petrocultures Research Group at the University of Alberta —in developing discourses around 
Energy Humanities; social as well as environmental consequences of energy once it gets 
industrialized across the globe; exploring the history of energy use and energy transitions  
Energy and Modernity  (12 lectures): The self -reflexive relationship between energy, 
rationality  modernity, and capitalist ecologies of development; Role of critical theory in the 
humanities and social sciences to formulate an effective critique of the multiple narratives of 
Western centric enlightenment narrative of modernity and discussing the dive rse 
manifestations of this narrative within formulations of energy discourses; the progress and 
growth of Energy in the global North through colonialism and  exploitation of the people and 
resources of the global South. 
A Critical Theory of Energy in the Anthropocene: (10 lectures) The ways in which energy humanities 
interrogates systems and processes promulgated by an energy -focused society; 
Petromyopia; the need to reenvision the theoretical lexicon and applied vocabularies of 
history, politics, philosophy, literary and cultural studies and the need to add energy as a key 
variable for imagining inquiry into humanistic questions in the Age of the Anthropocene; 
understanding the ontological positions of dominant and minority socio-political subjects who 
inhabit energy landscapes  
Energy Humanities and its Futures: (4 lectures): Locating the political and public discourse around 
key energy issues of the future and explore the role of energy within international relations; 
identify examples of best practices re garding climate change policy and how we can move 
toward solving our current energy and environmental dilemmas by making humanistic 
research a part of the conversation 
Textbooks 
A curated course artifact with all the study material will be given to the students 
 
Reference Books 
Nye, D. E. (1997). Electrifying America Social meanings of a new technology. MIT Press.  
126 
 
Prakash, G. (1999). Another reason: science and the imagination of modern India . Princeton 
University Press.  
Sieferle, R. P. (2010). The subterranean forest energy systems and the Industrial Revolution. White 
Horse. 
Huber, M. T. (2013). Lifeblood: oil, freedom, and the forces of capital. University of Minnesota Press.  
Harding, S. G. (Ed.). (2011). The Postcolonial Science and Technology studies reader . Duke 
University Press. 
Szeman, I., & Boyer, D. (Eds.). (2017). Energy humanities: an anthology. Johns Hopkins University 
Press.  
Allen, R. C. (2018). The British industrial revolution in global perspective . Cambridge University 
Press.   
Mukherjee, R. (2020). Radiant infrastructures: media, environment, and cultures of uncertainty . 
Duke University Press.  
Mišík Matúš, and Kujundžić Nada (Eds.). (2021). Energy humanities: current state and future 
directions. Springer. 
 
Online Course Material 
1. Carnegie Mellon University: The Imperative of Energy Humanities 
(https://youtu.be/2q7t9_TlEG0) 
 
 
  
127 
 
 
Course Title Theories of Intelligence Course No. CG4xx 
Department Science of Intelligence Structure (L-T-P 
[C]) 
3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives 
1. The course will provide the introductory overview of the concept of Intelligence.  
2. Acquainting the student to the historical significance, and practical implication. 
3. Develop comprehensive understanding and scientific underpinning of concept of Intelligence.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Develop scientific understanding of concept, measurement and application of intelligence.  
2. Acquire Psychological explanation of Intelligence and apply it to other similar concepts. 
 
Contents  
Historical development and concept of Intelligence: Origin of study of intelligence in 
Psychology; Defining Intelligence: Philosophical and Psychological; Language and intelligence; 
Biological, racial and cultural difference in Intelligence (8 Lectures) 
Theories of Intelligence: Psychometric theories; cognitive theories; cognitive-contextual theories; 
and biological theories. (10 Lecture) 
Intelligence and related concepts : Social Intelligence; Emotional Intelligence; System 
Intelligence, Personality and Intelligence, Emotion and Intelligence. (8 Lectures) 
Measurement of Intelligence : Psychometric assessment; Psychophysiological assessment (6 
Lectures) 
Contemporary issues related to Intelligence: Intelligence and performance link, Human 
Intelligence in the era of artificial intelligence, Beyond Intelligence:  concept of practical intelligence 
and concept of Wisdom (10 Lectures) 
 
 
Reference Book  
1. Bray, M.A, Kehle, T.J., and Nathan, P.E., (2013), The Oxford Handbook of School Psychology. 
Oxford University Press. 
2. Cacioppo, J.T. & Freberg, L.A., Discovering Psychology: The science of human mind, Cengage 
Learning, 2013 
 
Online Resource 
1. McKimmie, et. al, Introduction to Developmental Psychology, edX 
https://www.edx.org/course/introduction-to-developmental-psychology 
2. Bloom, P, Introduction to Psychology, course era 
https://www.coursera.org/learn/introduction-psychology#instructors   
 
  
128 
 
Course Title Advanced Cognitive Processes Course No. CG4xx 
Department Science of Intelligence L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives 
1. The course will provide the introductory overview of the Cognitive processes. 
2. Understand fundamental cognitive theories of attention, memory, executive function and decision-
making. 
3. Develop comprehensive understanding and scientific underpinning of relation of brain, mind, and 
behavior. 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Develop a knowledge base in cognitive Science and demonstrate familiarity with the major 
concepts, theoretical perspectives, empirical findings, and historical trends in cognitive Science.  
2. Respect and use critical and creative thinking, skeptical inquiry, and the scientific approach to solve 
problems relating to mental processes. 
 
Contents  
Introduction:  Introduction to cognitive Processes and Cognition,  Foundation of Cognitive 
Psychology, the architecture of the Mind  (4 Lectures) 
Knowledge and Mental Imagery: Concept formation, Different approach to Categorization, 
Semantic Network theory and model, Visual Imagery, Mental imagery, Cognitive Map, Schemas  and 
Spatial cognition (5 Lecture) 
Metacognition and Memory:  Basic process of memory encoding storage and retrieval, Short term 
memory/working memory, long term memory, Models of Memory, context and encoding specificity, 
metacognition and memory strategies, and forgetting, Memory for action,  (5 Lectures) 
Language : Language acquisition, Language Comprehension, Speech perception, Constituent 
structure, Language Production and reading, Codes switching and Second Language Proficiency, 
Multilingualism (8 Lecture) 
Problem Solving and Creativity: : Classification of problems; Newell and simon’s Theory; Problem-
solving Approaches, Nature and Measurement; Approaches to creativity, Factors affecting Creativity, 
Science of creative intelligence  (7 Lectures) 
Reasoning and Decision making:  Logical Reasoning and Decision Making,  Theories of Thought 
processes; Decision making; Algorithms and Heuristics - representativeness, availability, anchoring 
and adjustment; Cognitive biases  in decision making. (8 Lectures) 
Cognition and Emotion : Quantifying Cogni tion and affect, Affect cognition relations in specific 
cognitive processes like perception, attention, memory and judgement, System Theory, Emotion 
regulation (5 Lectures) 
 
Reference Book  
3. Galotti, K. M. (2017). Cognitive psychology in and out of the laboratory. Sage Publications.  
4. P. Thagard, (2005), Mind: Introduction to Cognitive Science, 2nd Edition. MIT Press.  
Online Resource 
3. Professor Michela Massimi et. al, Philosophy and the Science s: Introduction to the 
Philosophy of Cognitive Sciences, coursera.  https://www.coursera.org/learn/philosophy-
cognitive-sciences  
4. Kathleen M Galotti, Cognitive Psychology in an d out of the Laboratory. 
https://edge.sagepub.com/galotticogpsych6e/student-resources/chapter-9/video-and-
multimedia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
129 
 
Course Title Engineering Psychology Course No. HS 4XX 
Department HSS Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. The course will provide the introductory overview of the Human factor and Engineering 
Psychology. 
2. This course will allow the students to recognize the integrated (systems) nature of 
Engineering Psychology, the centrality of human beings in systems design, and to use the 
topics covered and the available knowledge base to adapt the environment to people.  
. 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Identify human performance capacities and limitations in modern human-machine systems; 
2. Develop a knowledge base in engineering Psychology and demonstrate familiarity with the 
major concepts, theoretical perspectives, empirical findings, and historical trends.  
3. Respect and use critical and creative thinking, skeptical inquiry, and the scientific approach 
to solve problems relating to Human factor and engineering Psychology. 
 
Contents  
Module 1:    Introduction to Engineering Psychology and Human Performance, Signal Detection 
Theory, Information Theory 
Module 2:    Theories of attention, Attention in Perception and Display Space,   Spatial Displays 
Navigation and Interaction in Real and Virtual Environments, Multi-tasking 
Module 3:  Cognition, Memory and Training, Attention, Time -Sharing, and Workload , Selection of 
Action Manual Control, Stress and Human Error, Social Factors, Cognitive Offloading 
Module 4:   Decision making, normative and naturalistic decision -making models, Control Theory, 
and the Lens Model of Brunswick 
 
Reference Book  
1. Wickens, C. D., & Hollands, J. G. (2000). Engineering psychology and human performance 
(3rd Ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.  
2. Introduction to Human Factors Engineering (2nd Edition) by Christopher D. Wickens, John 
Lee, Yili D. Liu, Sallie Gordon-Becker, 2003.  
Online Resource 
1. Professor Michela Massimi et. al, Philosophy and the Sciences: Introduction to the Philosophy 
of Cognitive Sciences, coursera.   https://www.coursera.org/learn/philosophy-cognitive-
sciences  
2. Kathleen M Galotti, Cognitive Psychology in and out of the Laboratory. 
https://edge.sagepub.com/galotticogpsych6e/student-resources/chapter-9/video-and-
multimedia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
130 
 
Course Title Cognitive Psychology Course No. HS 7XX 
Department HSS Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG and PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. To learn the different ways of conceptualizing the concept of Cognitive Psychology and 
cognition.  
2. To understand the cognitive processes Underlying Human Behavior.  
3. Since there is no universal approach to study all “Cognition”, the present course will use a 
number of older and newer approaches for studying Cognition. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. This course will provide tools that are needed to think critically about problems relating to 
cognition and Human Behavior.  
2. The knowledge from the course will be useful in tackling everyday problems and attaining 
optimal solutions.  
3. Knowledge about human cognitive systems can be used in designing sophisticated Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) systems that learn from mistakes and make our lives a lot easier to live.  
 
Contents  
Module 1:   History, The cognitive Revolution, Philosophical issues, Theory and research in Human 
Cognition  
Module 2:   Object Perception and Recognition, Attention, Review of different approaches, 
automaticity , consciousness, awareness 
Module 3:   Human and Artificial Intelligence, memory, visual and spatial memory, memory of 
general knowledge, concept formation  
Module 4:   Language skills, thought process , Problem solving and creativity, Reasoning and 
decision making  
 
Reference Book  
1. Galotti, K. M. (2017). Cognitive  psychology in and out of the laboratory. Sage 
Publications.  
2. P. Thagard, (2005), Mind: Introduction to Cognitive Science, 2nd Edition. MIT Press.  
3. Sternberg, R. J., Sternberg, K.,(2012). Cognitive psychology. Cengage Learning Press.  
Supplementary Readings: 
Research article related to recent trends in Cognitive Psychology research 
 
Online Resource 
1. Professor Michela Massimi et. al., Philosophy and the Sciences: Introduction to the 
Philosophy of Cognitive Sciences, coursera.  https://www.coursera.org/learn/philosophy-cognitive-
sciences 
2. Professor Barbara Oakley et. al., Learning How to Learn: Powerful mental tools to help you 
master tough subjects, Coursera. https://www.coursera.org/learn/learning-how-to-learn 
3. Professor Steve Joordens,   Introduction to Psychology, Coursera, 
https://www.coursera.org/learn/introduction-psych  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
131 
 
Course Title Introduction to Cognitive 
Neuroscience 
Course No. HS 7XX 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for UG and PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. To learn about the fundamentals of Neuroscience. 
2. To understand the role of brain imaging in Neuroscience. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Demonstrate familiarity with basic anatomy and physiology of the Brain. 
2. Explain how the brain allows us to do every day behaviour. 
3. Understand the neuroanatomy, different functional aspect of brain and principles of signal 
processing in Brain. 
 
Contents  
Module 1:   Introduction to cognitive Neuroscience, Neuroanatomy, Neuron, Action Potential, Sensory 
processing and motor systems 
Module 2:  Behavioural measure of Cognition,  Neuroimaging Methods in Cognitive Neuroscience, 
EEG, fMRI 
Module 3:   Neural process of Attention, Vision, Language, motor control, Navigation,  and Memory,  
Module 4:   LTP and Synapses, Value based decision making, Reinf orcement Learning, Emotion and 
Social Cognition, Potential societal implication of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 
Reference Book  
1. Principles of Cognitive Neuroscience, 2nd Edition (2013) Dale Purves, Roberto Cabeza, Scott 
A. Huettel, Kevin S. LaBar, Michael L. Platt and Marty G. Woldorff. Sinauer Associates, Inc. 
2. Ward, J. (2015). The student's guide to cognitive neuroscience. Psychology press. 
3. Gazzaniga, M. S., Ivry, R. B., & Mangun, G. R. (2013). Cognitive Neuroscience: The Biology 
of the Mind, 4th Edn New York. NY: Norton & Company. 
4. Bernard, B., & Nicole, G. (2018). Fundamentals of Cognitive Neuroscience. A Beginner’s 
Guide. 
 
Supplementary Readings: 
Research article related to recent trends in Cognitive neuroscience research 
 
Online Resource 
1. Professor Peggy Mason, Understanding the Brain: The Neurobiology of Everyday Life, 
coursera.  https://www.coursera.org/learn/neurobiology#instructors  
2. Professor Arnold Bakker et. al., Neuroscience and Neuroimaging Specialization, Coursera. 
https://www.coursera.org/specializations/computational-neuroscience 
 
 
  
132 
 
sssCourse 
Title 
Introduction to Cultural Studies Course No. DHL7XX0 
Department IDRP-DH Structure (L-T-P-D 
[C]) 
3-0-0-0 [3] 
Offered for Ph.D. (Cr>=0); M.Sc. (Cr >=30); M.Tech. 
(Cr>=0); B.Tech. (Cr>=100) 
Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives 
 
1. Teach cultural studies as an interdisciplinary field which draws from and contributes to 
literature, media studies, cultural anthropology, and sociology amongst other disciplines.  
2. Equip students with methods and frameworks to look at the central preoccupations of the 
field – identity, power, economy, culture, aesthetics, and social institutions. 
3. Critically interrogate the benefits of cultural studies for both inter- and intra-disciplinary 
work. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
 
1. Understand major theories relating to historical and emergent ideas of culture and social 
thought. 
2. Investigate processes of cultural production, consumption, and preservation using 
conceptual tools from the field of cultural studies.   
3. Contextualize the role, applications, and significance of culture in the digital age.  
 
Contents  
Culture in the 19th and 20th centuries: The Emergence of the Culture Concept, Evolution of Culture, 
Culture and the Industrial Revolution (5 lectures), The Culture Industry (Value and Meaning), 
Culture as Commodity (Mass Culture) (5 lectures) 
Culture and Politics: Aesthetics and Politics, National Culture, Cultural Semiotics and Political Life (5 
lectures) Cultural Economy, Political Society (5 lectures) 
Culture and Pedagogy: Culture and the Disciplines - Literary Studies, Anthropology, Sociology, 
History, Linguistics/Philology, Visuality Studies, Political Science (6 lectures), Understanding the 
Two Cultures - Natural and Human Sciences, Addressing the Pedagogical and Intellectual Divide (5 
lectures)  
Culture and Contemporary Life: Mapping the City, Urban Lives and Cultures (5 lectures), Knowledge 
Society, Technology, Precarity, Virtuality, Representation and Alternate Realities, Culture and Big 
Data (6 lectures) 
Text Books 
1. Simon During. 1993. The Cultural Studies Reader. London: Routledge. 
2. Toby Miller. 2001. A Companion to Cultural Studies. Malden: Blackwell. 
3. Tom Boellstorff. 2015. Coming of Age in Second Life. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
4. Tejaswini Niranjana and Wang Xiaoming (eds.) 2015. Genealogies of the Asian Present: 
Situating Inter-Asia Cultural Studies. New Delhi: Orient Blackswan. 
5. Andrew Milner. 1994. Contemporary Cultural Theory: An Introduction. London: University 
College London Press: London. 
Self Learning Material 
1. Avishek Parui. Introduction to Cultural Studies, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Humanities and Social Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology-Madras, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/109/106/109106136/. 
2. Liza Das. Cultural Studies, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Humanities and Social 
Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology-Guwahati, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/109/103/109103019/. 
3. http://culturalstudiesnow.blogspot.com/ 
 
 
 
133 
 
Course Title Analysis of Social Media 
Networks 
Course No. DHL7XX0 
Department IDRP-DH L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for Ph.D. (Cr>=0); M.Sc. (Cr >=30); 
M.Tech. (Cr>=0); 
B.Tech. (Cr>=100) 
Type Elective 
Prerequisite None Anti-requisite Social Networks,  Social 
Network Analysis 
Objectives 
1. The course introduces social network analysis, its mathematical foundations, and  
analyzing tools (Pajek or NodeXL or UCINET or Others). 
2. Students will be introduced to different types of online networks and how to use them to 
answer social, economic, and other queries. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
 
1. Students will be able to acquire social media data, formulate a hypothesis, and find an  
answer out of network data. 
 
Contents 
Introduction: Overview and Aspects of Networks, Ego Network, Characteristics of Social 
Networks. (3 Lectures) 
Mathematical Foundation for Social Network Analysis : Graphs, Matrices. (4 Lectures)  
Network Data: Sources, Sampling and bounding, Ethical considerations, and Collection 
Techniques. (4 Lectures) 
Network Data Management: Data format, Import, Cleaning, Transformation, Export, Visualization 
(3 Lectures) 
Information Diffusion Analysis: Centrality and Network Value, Influence, Epidemics Modeling (3 
Lectures) 
Clustering and Grouping: Community detection, election campaign analysis. (3 Lectures) Networks 
in Their Surrounding Contexts : Homophily, Affiliation, Behaviour Modeling (3 Lectures)  Markets 
and Strategic Interaction in Networks : Network Models of Markets, Bargaining and Power  in 
Networks, Sponsored Search Markets, Network Effects and Economy (5 Lectures) 
Voting: Group Decision-Making, Information Aggregation (3 Lectures) 
Case Studies: Wiki Networks, YouTube, Flickr, Twitter, Facebook, Email Communication Network, 
Thread Network (11 Lectures) 
 
Text Books 
 
1. David Easley and Jon Kleinberg (2013), Networks, Crowds, and Markets: Reasoning  
About a Highly Connected World, Cambridge University Press. 
2. S. Borgatti, M. Everett and J.C. Johnson (2013), Analyzing Social Networks, Sage. 
3. Derek L. Hansen, Ben Shneiderman and Marc A (2011), Analyzing Social Media Networks  
with NodeXL, Morgan Kaufmann 
Reference Books 
1. Albert-Laszlo Barabasi (2016), Network Science, Cambridge University Press. 
2. Mark Newman (2018), Networks, Oxford University Press 
3. Wouter de Nooy, Andrej Mrvar, Vladimir Batagelj (2018), Exploratory Social Network  
Analysis with Pajek, Cambridge University Press 
Self Learning Material 
1. Complex Networks, https://www.barabasilab.com/course 
2. NPTEL Lecture, Social Networks https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106106169/# 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
134 
 
Course Title Digital Storytelling Course No. DHL7XX0 
Department IDRP-DH Structure (L -T-P-
D [C]) 
3-0-0-0 
[3] 
Offered for Ph.D. (Cr>=0); M.Sc. (Cr >=30); M.Tech. 
(Cr>=0); B.Tech. (Cr>=100) 
Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives 
 
1. Understand and examine the new tenets of storytelling in the digital age through  
thoughtful analysis of trends, topics, consumption and digital tools used. 
2. Analyze the changing roles of storytellers for news, businesses and nonprofit organizations. 
3. Increase ability to come up with big, original ideas and creatively. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
 
1. Develop a deeper sense of why and how we create and value stories 
2. Learn about the ways digital communication technologies can expand and enhance narrative 
techniques 
3. Develop narrative technique and the ways digital elements can interact with  traditional 
written narratives to change the ways an audience experiences story 
4. Learn how to match narrative techniques to an audience 
 
Contents 
 
New Technologies, Creative Opportunities : Evolution, Digital Entertainment, Convergence  (4 
Lectures) 
Creating Story-Rich Projects: Interactivity, Character Dialogue, Emotion (6 lectures), Social 
Media, Transmedia, Project creation (6 lectures) 
Harnessing Digital Storytelling for Pragmatic Goals: Teaching, Advertising, Training (9  
Lectures) 
Media and Models: Mobile Device and Applications, Video Games (6 lectures), Interactive Cinema, 
Interactive TV, Electronic Kiosks, Immersive Environments (6 lectures) 
Digital Storytelling Tools (5 Lectures) 
 
Text Book 
 
1. C.H., Miller, Digital Storytelling, A Creator’s Guide to Interactive Entertainment,  Focal Press, 
2004 
 
Reference Books 
 
1. Seth Gitner, (2015), Multimedia Storytelling for Digital Communicators in a  
Multiplatform World, Routledge Publishers. 
2. Joe Lambert (2013), Digital storytelling capturing lives, creating community,  
Routledge Publishers. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
135 
 
Course Title Human Factors in Interaction Design Course No. DHL7XX0 
Department IDRP-DH Structure (L -T-P-
D [C]) 
3-0-0-0 
[3] 
Offered for Ph.D. (Cr>=0); M.Sc. (Cr >=30); M.Tech. 
(Cr>=0); B.Tech. (Cr>=100) 
Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives 
 
1. Introduce the study of human-computer interaction and user interface design. 
2. Explain theoretical understanding of the field and some practical UI design skills. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
 
1. Develop prototypes based on the interaction design principles. 
2. Participate as usability testers in evaluating the designs of others. 
 
Contents 
 
Introduction: Definitions, Interaction Design Principles, Paradigms, Vision, Theory, Models,  
Frameworks (5 Lectures) 
Introduction to human factors: Role of psychology, physiology in interaction design, Human 
Factors Perspective, Cognitive Aspects (5 Lectures) 
Social and Emotional Interaction: Conversation, Remote Interaction, Co -presence, 
Expressive Interface, Emotion Design, Anthropomorphism (8 Lectures) 
Interfaces: Types of Interface, natural Interface (5 Lectures), Multimodal, Wearables,  Brain 
Computer Interface (5 Lectures) 
Data Gathering and Analytics: Data Collection Techniques, Quantitative and Qualitative  
Analysis, Data at Scale (7 Lectures) 
Evaluation Techniques: Types of Evaluation, Usability Testing, Analytics and A/B testing,  
Predictive Models (7 Lectures) 
 
Text Book 
 
1. Sharp, H, Y, Rogers, J, Preece, INTERACTION DESIGN beyond human -computer interaction, 
John Wiley & Sons (2019) 
 
Reference Books 
 
1. Ratner, Julie (ed); Human factors and web development; Lawrence Erlbaum  
Associated (2003) 
2. Sanders, Mark S; McCormick, Ernest J; Human factors in engineering and design, McGraw 
Hill (1993) 
3. Zunse, Leonard; Visual perception of form; Academic Press (1990) 
4. Journal of Human Computer Interaction 
 
Self Learning Material 
 
1. NPTEL Lecture, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106/103/106103220/ 
2. NPTEL Lecture, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106/106/106106177/ 
 
  
136 
 
 Title Selected Topics in HSS - I Number HSL7XX0 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 
Offered for UG and PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite None     
  
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Expose the students to the latest upcoming fields in the area of HSS 
  
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply the knowledge of recent topics to specific research areas in the field of HSS 
  
Contents 
The topic clouds for the course include contemporary topics in HSS and may be updated according 
to the instructor. 
  
Textbook 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
  
Self-Learning Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
  
Preparatory Course Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
  
 
 
  
137 
 
Title Selected Topics in HSS - II Number HSL7XX0 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 
Offered for UG and PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite None     
  
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Expose the students to the latest upcoming fields in the area of HSS 
  
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply the knowledge of recent topics to specific research areas in the field of HSS  
  
Contents 
The topic clouds for the course include contemporary topics in HSS and may be updated according 
to the instructor. 
  
Textbook 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
  
Self-Learning Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
  
Preparatory Course Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
  
  
 
  
138 
 
Title Selected Topics in HSS - III Number HSL7XX0 
Department HSS L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for UG and PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite None     
  
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Expose the students to the latest upcoming fields in the area of HSS 
  
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply the knowledge of recent topics to specific research areas in the field of HSS  
  
Contents 
The topic clouds for the course include contemporary topics in HSS and may be updated according 
to the instructor. 
  
Textbook 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
  
Self-Learning Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
  
Preparatory Course Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
  
  
 