Source: http://intra.iitj.ac.in/acad_website/pg_curriculum/HUMANITIES%20AND%20SOCIAL%20SCIENCE_06092019.pdf
================================================================================

1 
 
 
Indian Institute of Technology 
Jodhpur 
 
   
 
 
 
 
PG Course Booklet 
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur 
July 2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Courses 
 
Offered by 
 
Humanities and Social Science Department 
 
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
PG Compulsory Courses(to be approved) 
1. HSN7XX0 Technical Communication 1-0-0 (1) 
2. HSN7XX0  Ethics and Professional Life 1-0-0 (1) 
 
PG Electives (to be approved) 
1. HSL7XX0  Cine-Politics under National Emergency 3-0-0 (to be approved) 
2. HSL7XX0 Sociology of Science and Technology 3-0-0 (to be approved) 
3. HSL7XX0 Digital Society 3-0-0 (to be approved) 
 
PG Electives (already approved) 
 
 
4. HSL7XX0 Gender and Society 3-0-0 (3) 
5. HSL7XX0 Sociocultural Theories 3-0-0 (3) 
6. HSL7XX0 Foundations of Sustainability 3-0-0 (3) 
7. HSL7XX0 Nature Writings in American Literature 3-0-0 (3) 
8. HSL7XX0 Literature and Environment 3-0-0(3) 
9. HSL7XX0 Twentieth Century Analytic Philosophy 3-0-0 (3) 
10. HSL7XX0 Language and Cognition 3-0-0 (3) 
11. HSL7XX0 Ethical Theories and Moral Practices 3-0-0 (3) 
12. HSL7XX0 Philosophy of Mind 3-0-0 (3) 
13. HSL7XX0 Bioengineering Ethics 3-0-0 (3) 
14. HSL7XX0 Cognitive Science 3-0-0 (3) 
15. HSL7XX0 Qualitative and Quantitative Methodology 3-0-0(3) 
16. HSL7XX0 Consciousness  3-0-0 (3) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Title Technical Communication Number HSNXX 
Department Humanities and Social Sciences L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 
Offered for M.Tech and PhD Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite None   
Objectives  
The Instructor will:  
1. Enable a student to face the challenges in communication, primarily in a technical milieu. 
2.Enhance a student’s English Language skills namely listening, speaking, reading and writing 
(LSRW) and the role played by them in the process of communication. 
3. Make students conversant in addressing communication challenges that impact organizations 
through sharing of best practices and group learning. 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Comprehend, recognize and articulate the formal elements of specific genres of technical 
communication. 
2.To gain a familiarity with practical and theoretical aspects of various trends and debates in 
technical communication 
3. To develop a sensibility and appreciation for some of the ideas, issues, and problems involved 
in writing about technology and in workplace writing. 
Contents Part I (HSS Faculty) Total –  07 hours (07 Lectures)  
Introduction to Communication – Introduction to Communication and the Importance of 
Communicating in English, Role of Emotions in Communication, Basics of Communication, 
Purpose and Audience, Cross-Cultural Communication, Language as a tool of communication, 
LSRW. (1 hour) 
Listening -Introduction to Listening, Types of Listening, Active Listening, Barriers to Listening, 
Listening to pre-recorded audio visual material/film. (1 hour) 
Speaking –Introduction to Speaking, Mock Personal Interviews, Body Language, Organizing and 
learning to make a presentation, Phonetics and Basic Pronunciation, Common Errors in English, 
Telephone Etiquette, Group Discussions.(2 hour) 
Reading - Purpose of Reading, Topic Sentence and its role, Reading for different purposes, 
Reading Comprehension, Reading Techniques. (1 hour) 
Writing– Introduction, Importance, Characteristics, Impersonal and Formal language, Elements 
of Style, Techniques for Good Technical Writing, Paragraph Writing, Writing a Formal Letter, 
Writing an Email, Plagiarism. (2 hours) 
 
Part II (Faculty of Engineering and Sciences) – 07 hours (07 Lectures) 
5 
 
Introduction to  Technical Communication 
Writing – Mechanics of Technical Writing, Organization and Structure in Technical Writing, 
Writing an abstract, Writing a Research Paper, Writing a Review, Report Writing, Writing 
Technical descriptions, Copyediting and formatting, Referencing, Citations, Plagiarism.(4 hours) 
Reading – Identifying Language Errors, Reading Comprehension with specific reference to 
passages/articles in Science and Technology. (1 hour) 
Lectures with Hands on Training – Grammarly, End note, Language software, Document 
processing using software.(2 hours) 
 
Reference Books 
1.Raman, Meenakshi and Sangeeta Sharma. Technical Communication: Principles and Practice. 
Oxford University Press: New Delhi, 2011. 
2. A Text Book of English for Engineers and Technologists. Division of Humanities and Social 
Sciences, Anna University, Orient Black Swan: Chennai, 2002. 
 
Online Course Material 
1.Technical English for Engineers-https://nptel.ac.in/courses/109106094/ 
 
  
6 
 
Title Ethics and Professional Life Number HSN7XX0 
Department Humanities and Social Sciences L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 
Offered for M.Tech and PhD Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite None   
Objectives  
1. To help students identifying ethical responsibilities linked to their professions 
2. To assist students in analyzing professional decisions from ethical perspectives 
      3.   To help students cultivating professional integrity and moral ideals 
Learning Outcomes  
1. Students will be familiar with the manifold responsibilities attached to their professions 
2. Students shall be able toappreciate the role of normative principles in taking 
professional decisions  
3. Students shall be able to respond to ethical issues with integrity and creativeimagination 
Contents:  
1. Conceptual Foundations:  Why Should One be Moral ?; Relevance of Professional Ethics; Tools 
and Techniques; Professional Codes; Normativity of Science and Technology   
        (2 hours) 
2. Professions and Moral Dilemmas:  Contemporary Ethical Issues (to be analyzed with the help of 
case studies and focusing on the nature of the group): 
Personal: Normative Numbness; Conflicts of Interests; Theft; Deception; Corruption; Partiality  
Interpersonal: Contracts; Violation of Rights; Consent and Dissent; Special Obligations; privacy and 
confidentiality 
Organizational: Fairness within the Organization; Hiring; Conduct at Workplace  
Social: Norms for a Game Changer; IPR; Reliability of Research Findings; Risk Assessment; Animal 
and Human Experimentation      (09 hours) 
3. Professional Responsibility : Indiv idual and Collective Responsibility; Corporate Social 
Responsibility; Rectificatory Issues; Sustainability     (3 hours) 
 
Text Books: 
1. Ethical Issues in Professional Life, Callahan, J., Oxford University Press, 1998.  
2. Philosophy of Technology and Engineering Sciences, Meijers, A., Elsevier, 2009 
 
 
7 
 
Title Cine-Politics under the National Emergency Number HSL7XX0 
Department Humanities and Social Sciences L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 
Offered for B. Tech., M. Tech. and Ph.D. Programs  Type Elective 
Prerequisite None    
Objectives  
1.To help students explore the intricacies of cultural forms and practices in the  
larger context of the political lives of the Indian nation 
2.To help students become familiar with some of the most significant events in the 
history of post-independence India through the prism of film history and state policy 
3.To make students familiar with conceptual apparatuses in cinema studies and with 
the overlaps between political and cultural histories 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.Read archival and other materials that are relevant for history-writing 
2.Explore associations between public institutions, national history, mass and avant -
garde culture and the ever-changing socio-politico-cultural dynamics 
3.Develop acquaintance with contemporary scholarly writings on Indian history, 
cinema and politics  
 
Contents  
Introducing Emergency and its Politics –The National Emergency, historical trajectory, 
relevance in Indian politics, literature review (6 lectures)  
Cinema, Cine -Politics and Cultural Politics – Defining Cine -Politics, Nation -Industry 
negotiations, carrying out cine -archival research, reading of film industry and film 
society materials/publications, review of relevant theoretical schools in Indian 
cinema studies (12 lectures)     
Sponsorship and Censorship: the Indian New Wave and Other Cinemas - Censorship, 
Prime Minister’s 20-point program, role of I&B ministry, industrial responses, Indian 
New Wave and state -sponsored cinema in the 1970s, d ebates on sponsorship and 
film economy (12 lectures)  
Globalization of the Dictatorial in the 1970s: Digital Remembering – The idea of the 
dictatorial, ideological associations between global dictatorial regimes, cine -cultural 
evidence and responses, archiv ing of evidence in the days of the digital, conclusion 
(12 lectures)  
 
8 
 
Textbooks 
1. Rajadhyaksha, Ashish. Indian Cinema in the Time of Celluloid: From Bollywood to 
the Emergency. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2009.  
Reference Book 
1. Joshi, Priya, and Rajinder Dudrah, eds. The 1970s and Its Legacies in India’s 
Cinemas. New York: Routledge, 2014.  
Online Course Material 
1. https://indiancine.ma/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
9 
 
Title Sociology of Science and Technology Number HSL7XX0 
Department Humanities and Social Sciences L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 
Offered for B. Tech, M.Tech and Ph. D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
1. To help students conceptualize science and technology as embedded in culture, 
politics and sociality and understand how technical knowledge is produced in 
society.  
2. To help students explore the dynamic relationship between technology and 
society and discover how technology and society influence each other. 
3. To make students conversant with important and new concepts in science and 
technology studies in social anthropology.  
Learning Outcomes  
1.Comprehend technological progress as a social process  
2.Find connections between science, technology and culture and think beyond 
simple binaries like ‘natural’ and ‘social’ sciences and ‘nature’ and ‘culture’. 
3.Develop sensitivity towards an inclusive, sustainable use of technology and 
appreciate the significance of diversity in science studies  
Contents  
Introduction to the  Sociology of Science  – Introduction to the subject, its founding 
concepts and traditions, methods of doing STS studies, History of Science and its 
philosophical traditions – logical positivism,  falsification and its critique (5 lectures) 
Methodology of Science and its s ocial connections - Structure of scientific revolutions, 
Ethics and ethos in science and deviance in practice of science, the Matthew Effect, 
and practicing ‘agnostic’ science, scientific inventions as cultural capital, social life of 
scientists. (8 lectures)   
Social Construction of Science - Methods of representation in science, Ethnography of a 
laboratory, social construction of ‘realities’, social construction of nature, Effect of 
social understanding of race and gender on production of  scientific knowledge (9 
lectures) 
STS as Social Science  – Actor Network theory, Pasteurization and the world of non -
humans, influence of science studies on social sciences, ecological understanding of 
the world, towards an inclusive understanding of the u niverse through STS.(8  
lectures) 
Technology and New Media – Technology as applied science, Gaming as culture, 
Hacking as counter -culture, Social media, Algorithms as social documents (8 
lectures) 
Science and Technology in India - Science & Technology in Col onial India, Development 
10 
 
of Indian Science, Science and Governance in India (4 lectures) 
Textbooks 
1.Sismondo, S. (2010), An Introduction to Science and Technology Studies , 2nd 
Edition, Wiley Blackwell 
2.Miller, D. et. al. edited (2012), Digital Anthropology, Berg. 
Reference Book 
Felt U., Fouche, R. et. al. edited (2017), The Handbook of Science and Technology 
Studies, MIT Press 
Online Course Material 
1. Mallick, S.Science, Technology and Society , NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
HSS, IIT Guwahati, https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc17_hs26/preview 
2. Mishra, A.Sociology of Science , NPTEL Course Material, Department of HSS, Indian 
Institute of Technology Roorkee, https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc18_hs09/preview 
 
 
  
11 
 
Title Digital Society  Number HSL7XX0 
Department Humanities and Social Sciences L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech., M.Sc., M.Tech, Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
Introduce students to the dominant discourses that frame debates on digital society  
Familiarize students with the literature pertaining to web technologies and their 
cultural, legal and ethical formations and practices 
Familiarize students with the complex relationships between digital cultures and 
digital divides 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Identify the ways in which digital media shape identity 
Utilize new opportunities for meaningful data collection from and using sophisticated 
forms of artificial intelligence 
Identify knowledge and truth amongst the abundance of information 
Contents  
Introduction to Digital Society : Digital components of a connected society (2 
Lectures) 
Theorizing Digital Society: New forms of power; Data as sociomaterial objects ; 
Archives; Digital veillance (6 Lectures) 
Digital Identities and Relationships : Self and the Digital Society; Embodied 
Identities in Digital Society; Bias and Privilege  – Digital Inequalities ; Marginalised 
Histories; Cyborgs(6 Lectures) 
Digital Spaces and Practices : Rethinking space and surveillance in digital societies; 
Gender, Space, and Place in Digital Societies ; Urban Informatics and Sociological 
Imagination - Smart cities ; Digital Healthcare; Mobility in Digital Society; Digital 
Heritage (10 Lectures) 
Network Society: The Internet as a Network ; Networks and the Cultural Imaginary; 
Inequalities in the Network Society; I nformation Capital; Interface Design for Diverse 
Populations (10 Lectures) 
Re-conceptualizing Research in a Digital Age: Information Management  – Data 
Analysis Software ; Large Digital Systems ; Data protection and the politics of data 
privacy (8 Lectures) 
Textbook  
1. Lupton,D., (2015), Digital Sociology, London, New York:Routledge 
12 
 
2. Gere,C., (2008), Digital Culture, 2nd Edition, London: Reaktion Books Limited 
Reference Books  
1.  Bentkowska-Kafel, A., Cashen, T., and Gardiner, H. (Eds.) (2009), Digital Visual 
Culture: Theory and Practice, Bristol and Chicago: Intellect Books 
2. Karaganis, J . (Ed.), ( 2007), Structures of Participation in Digital Culture , Social 
Science Research Council, Columbia University Press 
3.  Tredinnick, L. (2008), Digital Information Culture: The Individual and Society in the 
Digital Age, Oxford: Chandos Publishing Limited 
Online Resources 
1. Digital Humanities Seminar Video Archive of the Open University, UK, 
http://www.open.ac.uk/arts/research/digital-humanities/videos 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 