Source: http://intra.iitj.ac.in/acad_website/pg_curriculum/IDRP%20SMART%20HEALTHCARE_06092019.pdf
================================================================================

1 
 
 
Indian Institute of Technology 
Jodhpur 
 
   
 
 
 
 
PG Course Booklet 
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur 
July 2019 
 
 
 
 
 
  

2 
 
 
 
 
Ph.D. Programme 
 
In 
 
Smart Healthcare 
 
Inter Disciplinary Research Platform 
 
  
3 
 
PhD program in IDRP Smart healthcare 
1. Introduction: 
The Smart Health Care IDRP aspires to create significant scientific and technological 
advancements in the area of Healthcare by bringing together a multidisciplinary team of 
scientists working in the interface of Biology, Chemistry, healthcare & Engineering. The 
research is intended to focus on designing and developing sustainable solutions for 
point-of-care health devices, drug discovery, affordable diagnostics, bio -compatible 
implants, and remote health care, including telemedicine. The IDRP platform is expected 
to support the development of various eHealth and mHealth based solutions for 
improving the quality of healthcare and making it available to large segments of the 
society. 
 
2. The major objectives are: 
 Augmenting existing methods for medical research using machine learning and 
artificial intelligence based approaches 
 Designing new and optimizing existing point-of-care health devices  
 Identifying novel methods for early diagnosis and personalized treatments 
 Creating a platform to use various electronic, mechanical, and bio -sensors for 
improving the remote health care facilities  
 
3. Expected Graduate Attributes 
Graduates will 
1. Be able to think critically and solve problems that are necessary for employment 
in biomedical, biotechnology, pharmaceutical industries, National research labs 
and Academic institutions at the global level. 
2. Develop a sense of ownership on the National missions for technology 
development, which will ca ter to societal needs in the area of affordable 
healthcare. 
3. Be exceptionally well trained in the laboratory enabling them to conduct high -
quality, reproducible research. 
4. Be able to read, understand and review intellectual property documents and 
recognize their rights. 
5. Be able to express their research ideas and present their data clearly in written 
and spoken format. 
6. Develop a strong work ethic and understand ethical considerations in biological 
research, which are both necessary for high-quality research. 
7. Develop healthy time management skills to plan and manage laboratory work as 
well as other miscellaneous research -associated demands on their time to 
effectively meet deadlines. 
4 
 
4.  Learning outcome: 
Graduates will 
• Be introduced to cutting -edge, interdisciplinary research areas like Diagnostics & 
Therapeutics development, Machine learning and Artificial Intelligence for 
healthcare, Novel drug development, Biomedical Instrumentation design,   
Biomedical Imaging& Image processing, Systems & Syntheti c Biology, Biosensors 
and Biomaterials Engineering. 
• Be exposed to common problems that are prevalent in the domains of affordable 
healthcare such as sustainable point of care diagnostic devices, personalized 
medicine, remote healthcare, bioimaging for spec ific diagnosis, and medical 
devices & implants  
• Receive effective, hands -on laboratory training as a part of laboratory courses 
and short -term research projects that are designed to teach research 
methodology and common lab techniques. 
• Be introduced to Pat ents and other intellectual property documents, the rights 
that they grant and necessary considerations while filing patents / technology 
that is protected by patents. 
• Develop their research communication skills by participating in seminars, journal 
clubs; manuscript writing and research grant writing workshops. 
• Receive training on building a work ethic by being a part of research groups 
working towards a common goal. Graduates will also appreciate the ethical and 
safety considerations while conducting biomedical research. 
• Be taught how to prioritize items on their schedule and how to budget time across 
the spectrum of activities including research and other necessary tasks. 
5. Essential Topic clouds 
Drug  
Development 
Point of care 
diagnostic device 
Systems 
Biology 
Artificial 
Intelligence & 
Machine 
learning 
Biomedical 
devices & 
implants 
Searching 
Microbiomes for 
novel antimicrobials 
 
Organic synthesis 
 
Drug screening & 
testing 
Sensor materials 
 
Biomarkers 
 
Biomolecular 
interactions 
 
Surface 
Immuno-
technology 
 
Disease 
processes 
diagnostics 
therapeutics 
 
Synthetic Biology 
Machine learning 
Artificial 
Intelligence 
Tissue 
engineering 
 
Biomechanics 
 
Artificial Organs 
 
5 
 
 
Animal Models 
 
Personalized 
medicine 
 
AI for healthcare 
 
 
 
functionalization 
 
Sensor 
development 
 
Qualitative and 
Quantitative Assay 
 
Biosignals 
 
Biosignal 
Processing 
 
Vaccine 
development 
 
Identification of 
novel biomarkers 
 
Understanding 
disease 
development 
Biomaterials 
 
 
 
6. Program Structure 
Cat Course Title L-T-P Credits  Cat Course Title L-T-P Credits 
I Semester   II Semester 
PE Elective 1 3-0-0 3 
 
PE Elective 1 3-0-0 3 
PE 
Elective 2 
 
3-0-0 3 
 
PE 
Elective 2 
 
3-0-0 3 
PE Elective 3 3-0-0 3 
 
PE Elective 3 3-0-0 3 
PE Elective 3 3-0-0 3 
 
PE Elective 3 3-0-0 3 
         
Total  12  Total (Graded + Non-graded) 12 
III Semester  IV Semester 
PE Elective 2-0-0 2      
6 
 
TH Thesis 0-0-
20 10  TH Thesis 0-0-24 12 
Total 12  Total 12 
V Semester  VI Semester 
TH Thesis 0-0-
24 12  TH Thesis 0-0-24 12 
Total 12  Total 12 
VII Semester  VIII Semester 
TH Thesis 0-0-4 2      
Total  2    
7. Credit Requirements for the degree 
Credit requirements 
Student with M Sc Students with M Tech Students with B Tech 
Course work credits 30 
Thesis 48 
 
Course work 12 
Thesis 48 
Course work credits 30 
Thesis 48 
 
 
 
 
  
7 
 
Courses 
(In addition to the courses mentioned below, a student can opt for any course floated in other IDRP 
programs relevant to the thesis) 
 
Title Software and Data Engineering Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.  Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Discuss techniques to manage a large amount of data 
2.  Provide mechanisms to design and develop data-intensive computing systems 
 
Learning Outcomes  
     The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Design complex end-to-end data pipeline for data processing 
2.  Critically identify and use the tools for data handling and management 
3.  Use modern software technologies to design and develop data analytical systems 
 
 
Contents 
CSL7XX0Cloud Computing and Virtualization 1-0-0 [1] 
Basics of complex software design: Concept of modular software, microservices, 
communication, 4+1 architectural views and patterns (5 lectures) 
Cloud Computing: Architecture of cluster computing, design of data centers, open data center 
platforms, fault-tolerant system design (5 lectures) 
Virtualization: Type-1 and Type-2 virtualization, virtual machine, containers, dockers (4 
lectures)  
CSL7XX0Data Management 1-0-0 [1] 
Data Management: Structured data, relational database management, unstructured data, 
semi-structured data,  Nosql database management (mongodb), column database, graph 
database, XML, JSON, HDFS, Handling drift in data, sensor data reliability at software and 
algorithmic level, sensor data analysis techniques (14 lectures)  
CSL7XX0Data Intensive Processing Systems 1-0-0 [1] 
Data Intensive Processing Systems: Architecture of large scale data processing systems, 
Hadoop, Apache Spark, Storm, parallel data processing concepts such as map-reduce, directed 
acyclic graph, resilient distributed datasets, dynamic resource allocation, partial & shared 
computation, storage architecture  (14 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1.  Bass L., Clements P., Kazman R., (2012), Software Architecture in Practice, 3rd edition, 
Addison-Wesley Professional 
2.  Martin K., (2017), Designing Data-Intensive Applications: The Big Ideas Behind Reliable, 
Scalable, and Maintainable Systems, 1st Edition,O'Reilly Media 
 
Self Learning Material  
1.  Tylor,R.N., Medvidovic,N. and Dashofy,E.M., (2014), Software Architecture Foundation: 
Theory and Practice, Wiley  
 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 
2. International Conference on Data Engineering  
 
8 
 
 
Title Algorithms for Big Data Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 
Offered for M.Tech. 1st Year, Ph.D. 1st Year  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives  
     The Instructor will:  
1.  Introduce some algorithmic techniques developed for handling large amounts of data.  
2.  Emphasize on both theoretical as well as practical aspects of such algorithms.  
Learning Outcomes  
     The students are expected to have the ability to:  
1.  Analyze existing algorithms as well as design novel algorithms pertaining to big data.  
 
Contents 
Sketching and Streaming: Extremely small-space data structures(4 lectures)  
 
Numerical linear algebra:  Algorithms for big matrices, Regression, Low -rank a pproximation, 
Matrix completion (8 lectures)  
 
Compressed Sensing: Sparse signals, Linear measurements, Signal recovery (8 lectures)  
 
External memory and cache -obliviousness: Minimizing I/O for large datasets, Algorithms and 
data structures such as B-trees, Buffer trees, Multiway mergesort (8 lectures)  
 
Reference Books  
Markovsky I, (2014), Low Rank Approximation: Algorithms, Implementation, Applications, 
Springer 
Eldar Y C., Kutyniok G. (2012), Compressed Sensing: Theory and Applications, Cambridge 
University Press.  
 
Self Learning Material 
1.   Department of Computer Science, Harvard University, Algorithms for Big Data 
 
 
 
 
  
9 
 
Title Machine Learning-1 Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. 1st Year, Ph.D. 1st Year Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite None    
 
Objectives  
     The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide motivation and understanding of the need and importance of Machine Learning 
in today’s world  
2.  Provide details about various algorithms in Machine Learning  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Develop a sense of Machine Learning in the modern context, and independently work   
on problems relating to Machine Learning  
2. Design and program efficient algorithms related to Machine Learning, train models,  
conduct experiments, and deliver ML-based applications  
 
Contents  
 
CSL7XX1: Introduction to Machine Learning: Supervised Learning 1-0-0[1] 
Introduction: Motivation, Different types of learning, Linear regression, Logistic regression (2 
lectures)  
Gradient Descent:  Introduction, Stochastic Gradi ent Descent, Subgradients, Stochastic 
Gradient Descent for risk minimization (2 lectures)  
Support Vector Machines:  Hard SVM, Soft SVM, Optimality conditions, Duality, Kernel trick, 
Implementing Soft SVM with Kernels (4 lectures)  
Decision Trees: Decision Tree algorithms, Random forests (2 lectures)  
Neural Networks: Feedforward neural networks, Expressive power of neural networks, SGD 
and Backpropagation (3 lectures)  
Model selection and validation: Validation for model selection, k-fold cross-validation, Training-
Validation-Testing split, Regularized loss minimization (1 lectures)  
 
CSL7XX2: Introduction to Machine Learning: Unsupervised Learning and Generative 
Models 1-0-0[1] 
Nearest Neighbour: k-nearest neighbour, Curse of dimensionality (1 lecture)  
Clustering: Linkage-based clustering algorithms, k -means algorithm, Spectral clustering (3 
lectures)  
Dimensionality reduction:  Principal Component Analysis, Random projections, Compressed 
sensing (2 lectures)  
Generative Models: Maximum likelihood estimat or, Naive Bayes, Linear Discriminant Analysis, 
Latent variables and Expectation-maximization algorithm, Bayesian learning (5 lectures)  
Feature Selection and Generation: Feature selection, Feature transformations, Feature learning 
(3 lectures)  
CSL7XX3: In troduction to Machine Learning: Computational Learning Theory and 
Deep Learning 1-0-0[1] 
Statistical Learning Framework: PAC learning, Agnostic PAC learning, Bias -complexity tradeoff, 
No free lunch theorem, VC dimension, Structural risk minimization, Adaboost (7 lectures)  
Foundations of Deep Learning: DNN, CNN, RNN, Autoencoders (7 lectures)  
Textbook 
1. Shalev -Shwartz,S., Ben -David,S., (2014), Understanding Machine Learning: From 
Theory to Algorithms, Cambridge University Press  
 
Reference Books  
1. Mitchell Tom (1997). Machine Learning, Tata McGraw-Hill  
 
 
Self Learning Material  
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.   Department of Computer Science, Stanford University,  
      https://see.stanford.edu/Course/CS229  
11 
 
Title Machine Learning II Number CSL8XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. 1st Year, Ph.D. 1st Year Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Machine Learning-1   
 
Objectives  
     The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide technical details about various recent algorithms and software platforms related 
to Machine Learning with specific focus on Deep Learning.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.   Design and program efficient algorithms related to recent machine learning techniques,  
      train models, conduct experiments, and develop real-world ML-based applications and 
      products   
 
Contents  
CSL7XX1: Machine Learning II: Introduction to Deep Learning 1-0-0[1] 
Model Search: Optimization, Regularization, AutoML (4 lectures)  
Deep Networks: Attention layers, Gated CNNs, Graph Neural Networks (8 lectures)  
Applications: Neural language models (2 lectures)  
 
CSL7XX2: Machine Learning II: Representation Learning & Structured Models 1 -0-
0[1] 
Representation Learning: Unsupervised pre-training, transfer learning and domain adaptation, 
distributed representation, discovering underlying causes (7 lectures)  
Structured models:  learning about depe ndencies, inference and approximate inference, 
sampling and Monte Carlo Methods, Importance Sampling, Gibbs Sampling, Partition Function, 
MAP inference and Sparse Coding, Variational Inference (7 lectures)  
 
CSL7XX3: Machine Learning II: Deep Generative Models 1-0-0[1] 
Deep Generative Models: Deep Belief Networks, Variational Autoencoder, Generative 
Adversarial Network (GAN), Deep Convolutional GAN, Autoencoder GANs, iGAN, pix2pix, 
CycleGAN, Conditional GANs, StackGAN (14 lectures)  
 
Laboratory Experiments 
Overview of Deep Learning platforms such Tensorflow and PyTorch.  
 
Textbook 
1.Goodfellow,I., Bengio.,Y., and Courville,A., (2016), Deep Learning, The MIT Press  
 
Reference Books  
1. Charniak, E. (2019), Introduction to deep learning, The MIT Press.  
 
Self Learning Material 
1.   https://www.deeplearningbook.org/ 
  
12 
 
 
Title Artificial Intelligence I Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. 1st Year, Ph.D. 1st Year  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives  
     The Instructor will: 
1.  Cover various paradigms that come under the broad umbrella of AI. 
 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to:  
1.  Develop an understanding of where and how AI can be used. 
 
Contents 
Introduction (1 lecture)  
Propositional logic (8 lectures)  
Search: Uninformed strategies (BFS, DFS, Dijkstra), Informed strategies (A* search, heuristic  
functions, hill-climbing), Adversarial search (Minimax algorithm, Alpha-beta pruning) (10  
lectures)  
Predicate logic: Knowledge representation, Resolution (6 lectures)  
Rule-based systems: Natural language parsing, Context free grammar (3 lectures)  
Constraint satisfaction problems (4 lectures)  
Planning: State space search, Planning Graphs, Partial order planning (4 lectures)  
Uncertain Reasoning: Probabilistic reasoning, Bayesian Networks, Dempster-Shafer theory,  
Fuzzy logic (6 lectures)  
 
Textbook  
1.Russel,S., and Norvig,P., (2015), Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, 3rd Edition,  
      Prentice Hall 
 
Reference Books  
1. Research literature  
 
Self Learning Material  
1.   Department of Computer Science, University of California, Berkeley,  
http://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLD52D2B739E4D1C5F 
2.   NPTEL: Artificial Intelligence, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106105077/ 
 
  
13 
 
Title Artificial Intelligence II Number CSL8XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. 1st Year, Ph.D. 1st Year  Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Artificial Intelligence-1   
 
Objectives  
     The Instructor will: 
1.  Cover modern paradigms of AI that go beyond traditional learning.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
     The students are expected to have the ability to:  
1.  Develop an understanding of modern concepts in AI and where they can be used. 
2.  Design, implement and apply novel AI techniques based on emerging real-world  
     requirements. 
 
Contents 
CSL8XX1: Artificial Intelligence: Probabilistic Reasoning and Knowledge 
Representation 1-0-0[1] 
Probabilistic Reasoning over time: Hidden Markov Models, Kalman Filters, Dynamic  
Bayesian Networks (7 lectures)  
Knowledge Representation: Ontological engineering, Semantic Networks, Description Logics  
(7 lectures)  
 
CSL8XX1: Artificial Intelligence: Making Decisions 1-0-0[1] 
Making decisions: Utility theory, utility functions, decision networks, sequential  
decision problems, Partially Observable MDPs, Game Theory (14 lectures)  
 
CSL8XX1: Artificial Intelligence: Reinforcement Learning 1-0-0[1] 
Reinforcement Learning: Passive RL, Active RL, Generalization in RL, Policy 
Search, Deep Reinforcement Learning (14 lectures)  
 
Textbook  
1.Russel,S., and Norvig,P., (2015), Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, 3rd Edition,  
      Prentice Hall 
 
Reference Books  
1. Yang, Q. (1997), Intelligent Planning: A decomposition and abstraction based approach, 
Springer Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg.  
 
  
14 
 
Title Mechanical Behavior of Materials Number MTL7320 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–2-0 
[4] 
Offered for M.Tech. and Ph.D. Type Elective  
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives 
1. To provide background on the mechanisms of deformation in engineering materials, 
and on the evolution of material microstructure when subjected to mechanical 
stress during materials processing and engineering applications 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Ability to design materials with improved mechanical properties and identify failure 
mechanisms in materials for engineering applications 
2. To measure important mechanical properties and correlate with the microstructure 
 
Contents 
Continuum Theory of Deformation: 3D-state of stress and strain, Mohr’s Circle, Generalized 
Hooke’s Law and introductory theory of elasticity, stress and strain invariants, Yield 
Criteria, Yield surface and normality (6 lectures) 
Defects in Crystals:  Vacancies and interstitials, edge, screw and mixed dislocations, 
Burgers vector, slip, cross -slip and climb, stress fields around edge and screw 
dislocations, strain energy of dislocations, dislocation -dislocation interaction: Peach -
Koehler force on dislocation, image forces, dislocations in different crystal structures (10 
lectures) 
Twinning in Crystalline Solids:  Deformation twinning, geometry of twin formation, twin 
shape, stress requirement for twinning, twinning in HCP, BCC, and FCC crystals (4 
lectures) 
Fracture and Toughening Mechanisms: Theoretical fracture strength of a material and 
Griffith’s Law, modes of fracture, fracture toughness, G and R -curve, brittle and ductile 
fracture, toughening mechanisms in metals, ceramics, and polymers (8 lectures) 
Fatigue and Creep: Introduction to fatigue, stress and strain -life approach, cyclic stress -
strain curve, fatigue crack propagation, high temperature deformation, fatigue -creep 
interaction (8 lectures) 
Deformation of Polymers: Elasticity in dilute and semi -dilute polymer networks, nonlinear 
elastic deformation, rubber elasticity: Mooney-Rivlin and Ogden models (6 lectures) 
Laboratory Experiments 
Measurement of uniaxial monotonic stress -strain response of metals, ceramics, and polymers, 
Measurement of hardne ss via spherical and Vickers indentation and correlation with yield 
strength for ductile and brittle materials, The effect of grain size on mechanical properties, The 
effects of strain rate and temperature on yield strength, Recrystallization of cold rolle d metals, 
Measurement of impact fracture toughness using Charpy/Izod impact test, Fracture surface 
interpretation,  Creep of a 60%Sn-40%Pb Solder wire at room temperature. 
Text Books 
1. Dieter, G.E. (1986), Mechanical Metallurgy, 3rd Edition, McGraw-Hill Book Company. 
2. Courtney, T. H., (2005), Mechanical Behaviour of Materials , 2nd Edition, Waveland 
Press Inc. 
3. Shetty, M. N., (2013), Dislocations and Mechanical Behavior of Materials , Prentice 
Hall India Learning Private Limited 
 
Self-Learning Materials 
1. Hertzberg, R.W., (1976), Deformation and Fracture Mechanics of Engineering 
Materials, John Wiley and Sons 
2. McClintock,F.A., and Argon,A.S., (1966), Mechanical Behavior of Materials , Addison-
Wesley. 
 
15 
 
Title Frontiers  in Organic Chemistry Number CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Give an in-depth exposure to the latest advances in organic synthesis 
2. Inculcating in students a research-oriented approach towards solving synthetic organic 
chemistry problems 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Advance their knowledge in strategizing and synthesis of complex organic compounds  
2. Systematically read, understand and interpret the research reported in journals 
3. Develop skills of scientific presentations and interpersonal skills  
 
Contents 
Protecting Group: Selectivity and requirement of protecting groups, protecting groups and 
their deprotection (5 lectures) 
Advanced Radical Chemistry: Radical substitution reactions, coupling reactions, radical 
mediated cyclizations, addition reaction involving radicals, radical chain reactions (5 
lectures) 
Cycloaddition Reactions: 1,3-dipolar cycloadditions, higher order cycloadditions, asymmetric 
cycloadditions. (5 lectures) 
Advanced Enolate Chemistry: Diastereoselective aldol reactions, Evan’s chiral auxiliary, 
Ender’s chiral auxiliary, diastereofacial selectivity, asymmetric aldol reactions, 
Organocatalyzed aldol reactions (7 lectures) 
Total synthesis of complex molecules: total synthesis of penicillin, estrone, sparteine, 
prostaglandins, synthesis of important pharmaceuticals (12 lectures) 
C-H functionalization and C-H activation: Transition metal free reactions, Pd, Cu, Rh  
catalyzed C-H activation reactions, remote C-H functionalization and activation reactions (8 
lectures) 
 
Text books 
1. Carriera, E.M., and Kvaerno,L., (2009), Classics in Stereoselective synthesis, Wiley-VCH 
2. Kurti,L., Czako,B., (2005), Strategic Applications of Named Reactions in Organic 
Synthesis, Elsevier 
3. Carey,F.A., Sundberg,R.J., (2007), Advanced Organic Chemistry, Part B: Reactions and 
Synthesis, 5th Edition, Plenum 
 
Reference books  
1. Hudlicky,T., and Reed,J.W., (2007) The Way of Synthesis, Wiley-VCH 
2. Nicolaou,K.C., and Snyder,S.A., (2003), Classics in Total Synthesis-II: Further Targets, 
Strategies, Methods, Wiley-VCH 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Punniyamurthy,T., Catalytic Asymmetric Synthesis, NPTEL Course Material, Department 
of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104103067/ 
 
  
16 
 
Title Theory and Applications of 
Spectroscopic Techniques  
Number CYL6XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Compulsory 
 
Objectives 
 
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce to theoretical background of spectroscopic methods along with their 
instrumentation and application.  
2. Enable students to use such methods whenever needed by giving hands on experience 
with available instruments in the institute. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
 
The students are expected to: 
1. Apply spectroscopic methods as analytical tool in chemistry, biology, material science, 
medicine. 
2. Operate various spectrometers available in the institute. 
 
Contents 
 
CYL6XX1: Electronic Spectroscopy [1-0-0] 
Properties of electromagnetic radiation, interaction of radiation with matter, Stimulated and 
Spontaneous processes, Einstein coefficient, Rabi Oscillation, intensity of spectral line and line 
shape, Fourier Transformation, General understanding of spectroscopic selection rule. UV-vis and 
Fluorescence Spectroscopy: Basic principles, Laws of photochemistry, Jablonski diagram, Frank -
Condon principle, quantum yield expression and Stern-Volmer equation, FRET. (14 lectures) 
 
CYL6XX2: Infrared and Raman Spectroscopy [1-0-0] 
Basic principle; Organic functional group identification through IR spectroscopy, IR and Raman 
activity. (14 lectures) 
 
CYL6XX3: NMR and EPR Spectroscopy [1-0-0] 
NMR Spectroscopy: Basic principle, Zeeman splitting, chemical shift and spin-spin coupling, 
introduction to AB, AX, AMX spin system, 1D 1H and 13C NMR for structure elucidation, 
Polarization transfer methods and NOE. EPR Spectroscopy: basic principle, Electron-nuclear 
hyperfine interaction, theory of first order EPR spectra, analysis of 1st Order spectra, example of 
EPR spectra of organic radicals and transition metal complexes.  (14 lectures) 
 
Textbooks 
1. Gunther, H., (1995), NMR Spectroscopy, 2nd Edition, Wiley 
2. Banwell, C. N., (1994), Fundamentals of Molecular Spectroscopy, 3rd Edition, Tata 
McGraw-Hill Book Company 
3. Lakowicz, J. R., (2006), Principles of Fluorescence Spectroscopy, 3rd Edition, Springer, 
New York 
 
Reference Books 
1.Bernath, P. F., (2005), Spectra of Atoms and Molecules, 2nd Edition, Oxford University 
Press 
17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
2.Silverstein, R. M. and Webster, F. M., (2010), Spectroscopic Identification of Organic 
Compounds, 6th Edition, Wiley 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Mangal Sundar, K.,  Introduction to Quantum Chemistry and Molecular Spectroscopy, 
http:// http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104106083 
2. Trivedi, V. and Chaudhary, N., Bioanalytical Techniques and Bioinformatics, Department 
of Biotechnology, http:// http://nptel.ac.in/courses/ 102103044. 
3. Das, R., Principles and Applications of Electron Paramagnetic Resonance Spectroscopy, 
Department of Chemical Sciences, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/104106048/2 
18 
 
 
Title Principles of Drug Discovery Number BBL7XX1 
CSL7XX1 
CSL7XX2 
Department Bioscience & Bioengineering and Computer 
Science and engineering 
L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [2] 
Offered for M.Tech Type Elective  
Prerequisite None   
 
Objective 
The Instructor will: 
1. focus on route of drug design and discovery 
Learning Outcome 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. understand the principles of drug design and development 
Contents 
BBL7XX1: Principles of Drug Discovery [1-0-0] 
(fractal 1)drug targets, pharmacokinetics, administration and dosing, drug testing: in 
vivo and in vitro, drug discovery: natural lead, synthetic lead, combinatorial 
synthesis, pharmacokinetics based drug design, chemical development, process 
development, toxicology, pharmacology, drug metabolism, clinical trials, 
commercialization (14 lectures) 
CSL7XX0: Machine Learning-1 [2-0-0] 
(fractal 2) introduction, gradient descent, support vector machines, decision trees, 
neural networks (14 lectures) 
(fractal 3) nearest neighbour, clustering, dimensionality reduction, generative 
models, feature selection and generation (14 lectures) 
Textbook 
1. Stromgaard,K., Krogsgaard-Larsen,P., Madsen,U., Drug Design and Discovery, 5th 
Edition, CRC Press  
Self-Learning Material  
1. Department of Computer Science, Stanford University 
https://see.stanford.edu/Course/CS229 
 
19 
 
Title Introductory Chemical Biology Number BBL7XX0 
Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech Type Elective  
Prerequisite None   
Objective 
The Instructor will: 
1. build fundamental concept of interdisciplinary science, specially chemical biology 
 
Learning Outcome 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the importance of interdisciplinary sciences and its applications in 
bioengineering fields 
 
Contents 
Introduction: background and definition of chemical biology, overview of chemical biology, 
allied fields and their link with chemical biology, overview of protein structure and 
protein-protein interactions (14 lectures) 
Biomolecular-drug interaction: key discoveries in the field of chemical biology, few 
examples and journey through those discoveries, the use of unusual amino acids to probe 
biomolecular conformation, the use of novel fluorescence probe and applications, sirna as 
therapeutics, small molecule kinase inhibitors, gtp analogues as potential regulators for 
microtubule dynamics (14 lectures) 
Imaging: applications of small molecule as a probe for in vivo imaging, chemical tools for 
perturbation of protein-protein interactions, chemical platforms for protein-protein and 
protein-nucleic acid interactions (14 lectures) 
Textbook 
1. Chemical Biology: From Small Molecules to Systems Biology and Drug Design (Willey), 
Editor(s): Profs. Stuart L. Schreiber, Tarun M. Kapoor and Günther Wess 
Nature Chemical Biology, 2010, 6, 847-853 
Self Learning Material  
None 
 
 
 
20 
 
Title Algorithms in Biology Number BBL7XX0 
Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech Type Elective  
Prerequisite Nil   
Objectives:  
1. To  develop  an  understanding of  the  main  algorithmic   approaches  used  in  solving 
computational problems that arise in the analysis of biomolecular data (such as 
DNA/RNA/amino acid sequences, mass spectra of proteins, whole genomes, or gene 
expression levels). 
Learning outcomes:  
The students are expected to: 
1.  Understand various algorithms related to biological data analysis.  
2.  Develop new efficient algorithm to solve biological data. 
Contents 
Algorithms and Complexity: What is an algorithm?, Biological Algorithm versus Computer 
Algorithms, The change problem, Correct versus Incorrect Algorithms, Recursive 
Algorithms, Iterative versus Recursive Algorithms, Fast vs Slow Algorithms, Big -O 
Notation, Algorithm Design Techniq ues, Tractable versus Intractable Problems (10 
lectures) 
Greedy Algorithms:  Genome Rearrangements, Sorting by Reversals, Approximation 
Algorithms, Breakpoint: A different face of greed, A greedy approach to motif finding (10 
lectures) 
Dynamic programming algorithms: The power of DNA sequence comparison, the change 
problem revisited, the manhattan tourist problem, edit distance and alignments, longest 
common subsequences, global sequence alignment, local sequence alignment, alignment 
and gap penalties, multiple alignment, gene prediction. (10 lectures) 
Clustering and Trees:  Gene expression analysis, Hierarchical Clustering, k-means 
clustering, clustering and corrupted cliques, evolutionary trees, distance based tree 
reconstruction, Evolutionary trees and hie rarchical clustering, small parsimony problem, 
large parsimony problem (7 lectures) 
Gene selection algorithms: SAM, eBayes, Limma, CFS, mRMR, MRMS [5 lectures] 
Textbook 
1. Jones N. C. ,Pevzner   P. A.  (2014), An Introduction to Bioinformatics Algorithms, MIT 
Press 
Reference Books 1. Mitra S. and Acharya T. (2003), Data Mining: Multimedia, Soft 
Computing, and Bioinformatics, New York: John Wiley 
1.  Mitra S., Datta S., Perkins T. and Michailidis G. (2008), Introduction to Machine 
Learning and Bioinformatics, New York: Chapman & Hall/CRC Press. 
 
21 
 
Title Microbes as sensors Number BBL7XX0 
Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 1-0-0 [1] 
Offered for  Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
1. The instructor will discuss the methods by which living microbes can be used as 
sensors. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Students will have an ability to design live microbial based biosensors for 
sensing specific pollutants, marker for environment and/or health monitoring 
Contents 
Introduction: Advantages of using microbes as sensors, physical and chemical 
methods of microbial, immobilization. (4 lectures) 
Electrochemical microbial biosensor: Amperometric, potentiometric and 
conductimetric (5 lectures) 
Optical biosensors; bioluminescence, fluore scence, and calorimet ric based sensors 
(2 lectures). 
Metabolism based: Microbial sensors based on analysis of oxygen reduction rate or 
carbon di oxide production rate. (3 lectures) 
 Textbook 
No textbook. The research papers will serve as the reading materi al and reference 
material 
Reference Books 
1. Brock, et al., (2012), Biology of Microorganisms, 13 th edition Ben,jamin 
Cummings, Boston, MA. 
 
Online course material 
None 
 
 
22 
 
Title Immunodiagnostics and therapeutics Number  BBL7XX0 
Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–2 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. (MT) Program Type Elective 
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide an introduction to fundamentals techniques of clinical immunology and Immune 
based Diagnostics 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Immunology based diagnostics techniques for to create and 22nalyse diagnostics 
Contents 
Immunodiagnostics [14 lectures]: Selection of animals for immunological assays, 
Preparation of antigens, Immunization and methods of ble eding, Serum separation, 
Storage. Antibody titre by ELISA method. Double diffusion, Immuno -electrophoresis 
and Radial Immuno diffusion. Complement fixation test. Hybridoma technology and 
monoclonal antibody production. Lymphoproliferation by mitogen / antigen. 
Immunotherapeutics[14 lectures]: Active and passive immunization; Live, killed, 
attenuated, sub unit vaccines; Vaccine technology - Role and properties of adjuvants, 
recombinant DNA and protein based vaccines, plant -based vaccines, reverse 
vaccinology; Peptide vaccines, conjugate vaccines; Antibody genes and antibody 
engineering- chimeric and hybrid monoclonal antibodies; Catalytic antibodies and 
generation of immunoglobulin gene libraries 
Laboratory Experiments [12 experiments]: 
Immunoblotting for specific antigens, Dot blot assay, Blood smear identification of leucocytes 
by Giemsa stain. Quantification of Phagocytic activity, Separation of mononuclear cells by 
Ficoll-Hypaque. Immunohistochemistry (direct and indirect peroxidase assay), detection of 
Salmonella genus which causes enteric or Typhoid Fever by using qualitative slide 
agglutination test (Widal test), Detection of Treponemes responsible for veneral diseases such 
as  syphilis (VDRL) test, IgG Purification technique (Protein A Based, Spin Column) 
Textbook 
1.  R.A. Goldsby., Thomas,J.K., and Barbara,A, Osborne., Kuby Immunology, 
Freeman,2002, 6th Edition 
23 
 
2. Stanier, R. Y., General Microbiology, W.H. Freeman and Co., 2009. 
3. Pelczar, M.J., Chan, E. C. S., Krieg, N.R., Microbiology, Tata McGraw – Hill Education, 2001 
Reference Books 
1. Murphy, K., Travers, P., Walport, M., & Janeway, C. (2012). Janeway’s Immunobiology. 
New York: Garland Science. 
2. Madigan, M.T.,  Martinko, J.M.,  Brock, Biology of Microorganisms, Prentice-Hall, Inc., 
2006, 11th  Edition. 
Online Course Material 
1 NPTEL Video Lectures on  Essentials in Immunology by Prof. R. Manjunath, Prof. 
Dipankar Nandi , Prof. Anjali Karande, Indian Institute of Science Bangalore  
(http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104108055/) 
2. NPTEL Video Lectures on Cellular and Molecular Immunology by Prof. Sachin Kumar, 
Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati  (http://nptel.ac.in/courses/102103038/)   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
24 
 
 
Title Flux Balance Analysis Number BBL7XX0 
Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P 
[C] 
3–0–0[3] 
Offered for M.Tech Type Elective  
Prerequisite Nil   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide an introduction to flux balance analysis (FBA), reactions,  metabolites, & pathways, 
mass balanced linear equations, biomass reaction, how to create a stoichiometric matrix from 
reactions and metabolites, gene-protein-reaction associations, constraint-based modeling. 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Implement knowledge of important concepts related to the FBA 
2. To apply them to model the behavior of biological systems as well as develop st rategies for 
manipulating them. 
Contents 
Flux Balance Analysis Overview: Overview, Formulation of Flux Balance Analysis [1 Lecture] 
Reactions, Metabolites, & Pathways:  Identifying Metabolic Reactions and Metabolites (Gene -
Protein-Reactions), Desired Reaction Information, Genome -scale Reconstruction Reactions, 
Desired Metabolite Information, Genome -scale Reconstruction Metabolites, Metabolic Pathway, 
System Boundaries:Exchange & Transport Reactions, Genome -scale Metabolic Reconstructions, 
Reconstruction Process: 96 Step Protocol, E.coli Core Model [14 Lectures] 
Mathematical Representation of Reactions & Constraints:  Creating A Stoichiometric Matrix, 
Genome-scale Metabolic Reconstruction [2 Lectures] 
Mass Balanced Linear Equations:  How can we use the Stoichiometric Matrix?, Dynamic Mass 
Balance, The Conceptual Basis of Constraint -based Modeling, Role of Constraints, Flux 
Optimization [6 Lectures] 
Biomass Reaction:  Biomass Precursors, E.coli Precursor Metabolites, Maintenance Energy 
Requirements, Biomass Reaction For E.coli Core Model, Biomass Objective Function, Formulation 
of Flux Balance Analysis, E.coli Core Model [8 Lectures] 
Calculating Fluxes:  Cobra Toolbox, Matlab, Drawing Flux Values on a Map, Print Flux Values, 
Examples [8 Lectures] 
Flux Balance Analysis Toolbox:  Methods in Constraint -based Reconstruction and Analysis [3 
Lectures] 
25 
 
 
Textbook 
1.Palsson B. O., (2006), Systems Biology: Properties of Reconstru cted Networks, cambridge 
Press. 
Self Learning Material 
1. Utah State University, https://systemsbiology.usu.edu/syllabus.php 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 
https://nptel.ac.in/noc/individual_course.php?id=noc18-bt22 
  
26 
 
Title Systems Biology in Personalized Genomics Number BBL7XX0 
Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P 
[C] 
3–0–0[3] 
Offered for M.Tech Type Elective  
Prerequisite Nil   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Illustrate “big-data” problems in personalized genomics by discussing recent publications 
2. Provide training in high dimensional biological data analysis 
3. Familiarize the participants with the use of statistical tools and principles for an alyzing 
genomic/epigenomic data 
Learning Outcomes 
It will enable participants to utilize th e methods presented in this course for analyzing biological 
data. The course introduces the current research challenges faced in the field of  computational 
systems biology. 
Contents 
Course Overview and Introduction:  Design Principles of Complex Systems, Introduction to 
Genomics and Systems Biology [2 lectures] 
Topological and Network Evolution Models:  Small-World and Scale -Free Networks, Duplication -
Divergence, Complex Models of Network Evolution, Network Properties of Biological Networks [6 
lectures] 
Types of Biological Networks:  Types of Biological Networks, Genes2Networks and Network 
Visualization, Sets2Networks - Creating Functional Association Networks, Genes2FANs - Analyzing 
Gene Lists with Functional Association Networks [4 lectures] 
Data Processing and Identifying Differentially Expressed Genes:  Data Normalization, Univariate 
and multivariate methods for identifying differentially expressed gene sets  - Part 1, Univariate 
methods (SAM, Welch’s t -test, LIMMA,) - Part 2, Multivariate method (Principal Component 
Analysis; Gene Set Enrichment Analysis; Supervised and unsupervised machine learning for data 
classification, including Clustering, SVM and KNN) [15 lectures] 
Analytical Tools for Genomics:  Enrichment Analysis and Enrichr, GEO2Enrichr: A Google Chrome 
Extension for Gene Set Extraction and Enrichment, Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) - 
Preliminaries, Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA), Principal Angle Enrichment Analysis (PAEA), 
Network2Canvas (N2C) and E nrichment Analysis with N2C, Expression2Kinases: Inferring 
Pathways from Differentially Expressed Genes, DrugPairSeeker and the New CMAP, Classifying 
Patients/Tumors from TCGA [15lectures] 
 
27 
 
Textbook 
1.    Ma'ayan A. and MacArthur B. D. (eds.) (2012), New Frontiers of Network Analysis in Systems 
Biology, Springer. 
Reference Books 
Research literature 
Self learning materials 
1. Mount Sinai Center for Bioinformatics, https://www.coursera.org/learn/network-biology 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28 
 
Title Artificial Intelligence in Bioengineering 
Lab 
Number BBP7XX0 
Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 0-0-2 [1] 
Offered for  Type Open 
Elective  
Prerequisite Machine Learning-1   
Objective: 
The instructor will: 
1. prepare industry relevant advanced cross -disciplinary skills in machine learning 
applications in bioengineering. 
Learning Outcome 
The students will have an ability to: 
1. comprehend fundamental concepts and hands-on techniques of the state -of-the-
art data science and deep learning methodologies 
2. apply popular unsupervised learning methods, including clustering methodologies 
and supervised methods such as deep neural networks 
3. master techniques in modern data an alysis to leverage big datasets from omics, 
image and sensors; use pyspark skillfully to analyze big data 
Laboratory Experiments 
Introduction: data types, big data processing using pyspark (3 labs) 
Machine learning applications : supervised and unsupervised  techniques for omics 
data integration and analysis (4 labs) 
Deep learning: applications in omics, image and sensor data (7 labs) 
Textbook 
1. Shalev-Shwartz,S., Ben-David,S., (2014), Understanding Machine Learning: From 
Theory to Algorithms, Cambridge University Press 
2. Tseng,G., Ghosh,D., Zhou X.J., (2015), Integrating Omics Data,  Cambridge 
University Press 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Department of Computer Science, Stanford University 
https://see.stanford.edu/Course/CS229 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. https://www.tutorialspoint.com/pyspark/ 
 
29 
 
Course Title Advances in Food Safety and Technology Course No. CYP6XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Sc. (CY) Program Type Compulsory  
Pre-requisite   
 
Objectives 
 
The instructor will: 
1. Provide in-depth exposure of raw materials composition, consumer foods and fodder. 
2. prepare the students to analyze and improve the quality of foods. 
3. give knowledge on bio-active compounds, chemical and biochemical reactions, health 
effects and properties of food.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will be able to: 
1. Understand properties and reactions of carbohydrates, lipids and proteins during 
storage and processing of food and how these influence the quality and properties of 
the food. 
2. Have knowledge on and be able to use food regulations. 
3.  
Course Content 
Introduction: general aspects of food industry, world food demand and Indian scenario, 
constituents of food, quality and nutritive aspects. Food additives, standards, deteriorative 
factors and their control, preliminary processing methods, conversion and preservation 
operation. (6 lectures) 
 
Energy Engineering in Food Processing - Generation of Steam, Fuel and Electric Power 
Utilization, Process Controls in Food Processing, Systems for Heating and Cooling Food 
Products. Thermal Properties of Foods, Modes of Heat Transfer - Freezing Systems, Frozen-
Food Properties, Freezing Time refrigeration system for food products. (6 lectures) 
 
Processing Systems: Microbial Survivor Curves, Influence of External Agents, Thermal 
Death Time, Spoilage Probability. Preservation by heat and cold dehydration, 
concentration, frying, irradiation, microwave heating, sterilization and pasteurization, 
fermentation and pickling, packing methods. (10 lectures) 
 
Separation processes in food processing- Electrodialysis Systems, Reverse Osmosis 
Membrane Systems, Membrane Performance, Ultrafiltration Membrane Systems, 
Concentration Polarization. Types of Reverse-Osmosis and Ultrafiltration Systems, Drying 
Processes, Dehydration Systems, Dehydration System Design,Sedimentation, 
Centrifugation, Mixing. (6 lectures) 
 
Production and utilization of food products - soft and alcoholic beverages, dairy products, 
meat, poultry and fish products, treatment and disposal of food processing wastes. (6 
lectures) 
 
Packaging-Introduction, Food Protection, Product Containment, Product Communication, 
Product Convenience, Mass Transfer in Packaging Materials. Innovations in Food Packaging, 
Food Packaging and Product Shelf-life, Food canning technology, fundamentals of food 
canning technology.Heat sterilization of canned food, containers - metal, glass and flexible 
packaging, Canning procedures for fruits, vegetables, meats, and poultry marine products. 
(6 lectures) 
 
 
30 
 
Textbooks: Fundamentals of Food Engineering by Stanley Charm. 
1. Introduction to Food Engineering - R. Paul Singh, Dennis R. 
2. Food microbiology: fundamentals and frontiers. 2nd ed. Washington (DC): 
American Society for Microbiology 
 
Reference Book:  
1. S. Damodaran, K.L. Parkin, and O. R. Fennema, Fennema’s Food Chemistry, 
fourth edition, 2007, CRC Press 
2. Heldman, D.R., Food Process Engineering, The AVI Publishing Co; Westport, 1975 
 
Online Course Material 
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103107088/ 
2. https://swayam.gov.in/nd2_cec19_ag04/preview 
 
 
 