Source: http://intra.iitj.ac.in/acad_website/intra/IITJodhpur_Energy_PG_Curriculum_document-2020-08-21-12-08-pm.pdf
================================================================================

1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
M. Tech. and M.Tech-PhD 
 
in 
 
Civil and Infrastructure Engineering 
with Major in Energy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
Introduction 
 
With the tremendous focus on energy sources such as solar, wind, hydropower to name 
a few, skills to develop necessary infrastructure for energy generation, transmission 
and distribution from these sources are required. To cater to future needs and 
emerging infrastructure, the M.Tech. and M. Tech-Ph. D. Program on Civil and 
Infrastructure Engineering with a major (specialization) in “Energy” is exclusively 
designed. The program is offered to the students/candidates with diverse engineering 
backgrounds from India and abroad who are interested in learning and applying the 
fundamental and advanced technologies (energy conversion, transmission, 
distribution, storage and conservation) in different areas of energy engineering. The 
program equips students with a unique set of skills desired in multidisciplinary and 
dynamic energy industries. To facilitate prospective graduates with the scope of this 
program, “C areer T rajectory” maps for all disciplines are developed. A “Career 
Trajectory” is a framework for understanding the demand of different energy industries 
in terms of skills and their mapping with the courses that are being offered in this 
program across multiple departments. It will assist students in identifying the core 
skills (general, core, and advanced) and courses to build their career in the chosen 
energy industry. 
 
The program constitutes a unique value-added model that allows students to select 
courses from a) “Specialized Stream Electives" and (b) "M. Tech Electives" buckets to 
build their knowledge in a specialized stream and gain skills they would need to enter 
into the desired energy industry. Specialized courses are designed to tap rapidly 
changing energy market while employing emerging technologies. Furthermore, i t 
builds a platform for multidisciplinary research to unravel complex problems associated 
with global energy infrastructure. After successful completion of the program, students 
will be able to continue to a Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.) in a number of related areas 
of chosen stream . This program potentially delivers an ability to the graduates to 
change the landscape of our planet through advanced energy generation and 
management practices.  
An outline of the concept behind this program is presented in the following sections. 
 
Objective of the Program 
 
IIT Jodhpur Civil and Infrastructure Engineering graduates with a major in Energy will: 
1. Enter the industry as professionals and leaders to implement solutions to diverse 
technical challenges of energy infrastructure.  
2. Pursue innovative and advanced research as scholars and scientists in leading 
industry and academic R&D centers around the world to develop state- of-the-art 
technologies related to future energy infrastructure. 
3. Establish and lead startups in emerging areas of sustainability, resilience, 
management, and effective utilization of various sources of energy. 
4. Frame policies, management regulations and ethical guidelines correlating dynamic 
energy demands, utilization and distribution. 
 
Graduate attributes 
 
A successful graduate should be able to: 
1. Understand the relation between different engineering aspects (i.e. electrical, 
mechanical, chemical, etc.) of various energy infrastructures. 
2. Understand the impacts and limitations of different energy resources under various 
conditions. 
3 
 
3. Understand and relate the engineering, economy, and policy aspects of energy 
utilization. 
4. Design and implement energy-efficient infrastructure related to generation, 
transmission, distribution of energy. 
5. Carry out in-depth multi-faced investigations (e.g. analytical, experimental, and 
numerical) in various infrastructure engineering issues and propose innovative 
solutions. 
6. Design new models, collect relevant data, and perform validation to help in decision 
making, developing and implementing advanced energy infrastructure concepts, 
and solving engineering issues. 
7. Participate and work in interdisciplinary teams, demonstrate knowledge of 
advanced management skills, and implement sustainable practices in infrastructure 
engineering projects. 
 
Learning outcome 
 
Upon successful completion of the program, the graduate will have an ability 
1. To apply and demonstrate acquired knowledge of popular (solar, wind, etc.) and 
upcoming (tidal, biomass, fuel cell, hydrogen, etc.) energy technologies and their 
operation in infrastructure engineering practices. 
2. To apply engineering design and management aspects of the complete lifecycle of 
energy: from generation to distribution. 
3. To identify, formulate and apply basics of energy harvesting and storage to mitigate 
challenges related to power fluctuations. 
4. To apply appropriate techniques of modeling and prediction, modern engineering 
and IT tools to complex engineering activities with an understanding of the 
limitations. 
5. To plan, design and execute large scale infrastructure projects on smart cities to 
meet future energy needs. 
6. To compete, lead, and practice a successful professional career in the core areas 
of expertise with specialized knowledge in the interdisciplinary energy 
infrastructure sector. 
 
Overall Structure (M. Tech. in Civil and Infrastructure Engineering with Major 
in Energy) 
 
Category Program 
Core 
(PC) 
Specializat
ion Stream 
Electives 
(SSE) 
M. 
Tech.  
Elective 
(ME) 
M. 
Tech. 
Open 
(MO) 
M. 
Tech. 
Project 
(MP) 
Non-
Graded 
Courses 
Total 
Graded 
Credits 3 17 17 3 16 4 60 
 
Semester wise distribution of credits 
 
Cat
. 
Course Title L-T-P Credits  Cat. Course Title L-T-P Credits 
I Semester  II Semester 
PC Program Core 3-0-0 3  SSE Specialization stream - 
5 
3-0-
0 
3 
SSE Specialization stream -1 3-0-0 3  SSE Specialization stream - 
6 
0-0-
4 
2 
SSE Specialization stream -2 3-0-0 3  ME Program Elective – 1 3-0-
0 
3 
4 
 
SSE Specialization stream -3 3-0-0 3  ME Program Elective – 2 3-0-
0 
3 
SSE Specialization stream -4 3-0-0 3  ME Program Elective - 3 3-0-
0 
3 
NG HSN7XX0: Technical 
Communication 
1-0-0 1  NG HSN7XX0:  Professional 
Ethics  
1-0-
0 
1 
Total (Graded + Non-graded) 16  Total (Graded + Non-graded) 15 
III Semester  IV Semester 
MP Project-1 0-0-10 5  MP Project-2 0-0-
22 
11 
ME Program Elective - 4 3-0-0 3  NG OAL7XX0: IP 
Management and 
Exploitation  
1-0-
0 
1 
ME Program Elective - 5 3-0-0 3      
ME Program Elective - 6 2-0-0 2      
MO Open Elective-1 3-0-0 3      
NG OAN7XX0: Systems 
Engineering and Project 
Management 
1-0-0 1      
Total (Graded+ Non-graded) 17  Total (Graded + Non-graded) 12 
 
 
Program Core Course (PC) 
 
S.No. Course Title L-T-P Credits 
1 Introduction to Sustainable Infrastructure Engineering 3-0-0 3 
 
 
List of Specialization Stream Elective (SSE) Courses 
(Student may choose any 17 credits from the list below in addition to the mandatory 
program core) 
 
S.No. Course Title L-T-P Credits 
1 Solar Energy and Application 3-0-2 4 
2 Wind turbine and Field Design 3-0-2 4 
3 Offshore Tidal Energy Harvesting 3-0-0 3 
4 Offshore Wind Energy Harvesting 3-0-0 3 
5 Energy Storage  3-0-2 4 
6 Power Plant Engineering 3-0-2 4 
7 Smart Grid 3-0-2 4 
8 Biomass Energy Conversion 3-0-2 4 
9 Hydrogen and Methanol Economy 3-0-0 3 
10 Plugin Electric Vehicles 3-0-2 4 
11 Transmission Infrastructure 3-0-0 3 
12 Fuel Cell Technology 3-0-0 3 
13 Electrochemical Conversion and Storage 3-0-0 3 
14 Advanced Waste Water Treatment 3-0-2 4 
15 Selected Topics in Distributed Generations 3-0-0 3 
16 Materials for Electrochemical energy Conversion and Storage 2-0-0 2 
17 Energy Economics and policy 1-0-0 1 
18 Environmental Aspects of Power Plant 1-0-0 1 
19 Hydropower 3-0-0 3 
5 
 
 
 
 
List of Elective (ME) Courses 
 
Offering 
Department 
S. No. Course Title L-T-P Credits 
Electrical 
Engineering 
1 Substation Infrastructure 2-0-0  2 
2 Gas Insulated Substations 2-0-0 2 
3 Power System Protection 3-0-0 3 
4 Cyber-Physical Security in Smart Grid 3-0-0 3 
Civil & Infrastructure 
Engineering 
5 Stability of Slopes 3-0-0 3 
6 Rock Mechanics and Rock Engineering 3-0-0 3 
7 Reliability Engineering 3-0-0 3 
8 Structural Dynamics 3-0-0 3 
9 Wind and Earthquake Engineering 3-0-0 3 
10 Offshore Geo-technology 3-0-0 3 
11 Climate Change and Impact 3-0-0 3 
12 Air Pollution and Control 3-0-0 3 
13 Green Building and Sustainable 
Materials 
3-0-0 3 
14 Traffic Flow Theory 3-0-0 3 
15 Traffic System and Management 3-0-0 3 
16 Soil Stabilization and Ground 
Improvement 
3-0-0 3 
17 Foundation Engineering 3-0-0 3 
Mechanical 
Engineering 
18 Advanced Mechanics of Solids 3-0-0 3 
19 Theory of Vibration 3-0-0 3 
20 Remote Sensing and GIS for 
Environmental Management 
3-0-2 4 
21 Solid Waste Management 3-0-0 3 
Chemical 
Engineering 
22 Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion  1-0-0 1 
23 Wave Energy Conversion 1-0-0 1 
24 Process Safety and Hazard 3-0-0 3 
25 Advanced Energy Systems 3-0-0 3 
26 Microfluidic Fuel Cell 1-0-0 1 
Physics 27 Optics for Solar Energy Applications 3-0-0 3 
28 Energy Harvesting 3-0-0 3 
Computer Science 
and Engineering 
29 Artificial Intelligence – I 3-0-0 3 
30 Machine Learning - I 3-0-0 3 
TBD* 31 Selected Topic in Energy Science and 
Engineering 
3-0-0 3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
* Topic and course contents focusing on the emerging areas and energy technologies would be 
designed by the course instructor (or Department) 
6 
 
Topic Clouds Mapped with Specialization Stream Elective Courses (SSE) 
 
S.No. Courses Offering Department Topic clouds 
1 Solar Energy 
and Application 
Mechanical 
Engineering 
Solar radiations; Measurement; 
Concentrated Solar Power ; Energy 
conversion; Thermal comfort; Passive 
heating and cooling; Daylighting; 
Energy efficiency; Evaporative 
cooling; Zero energy building; 
Building modeling and simulation; 
Solar PV; Grid integration;  MPPT 
techniques; Solar panels 
2 Wind Turbine 
and Field 
Design 
Civil & Infrastructure 
Engineering 
Wind Measurement and statistical 
distribution; 2D and 3D 
Aerodynamics; Anatomy of wind 
turbines; Design of rotor blades; 
Horizontal-axis wind turbine; 
Vertical-axis wind turbine; 
Aeroelasticity; Control mecha nisms; 
Pitch and stall regulation  
3 Offshore Tidal 
Energy 
Harvesting 
 
Civil & Infrastructure 
Engineering 
Aerodynamic and hydrodynamic 
loads; Rotor and mooring dynamics; 
Tidal dynamics and ocean currents; 
Tidal energy system design; Control 
and stability of tidal power plants; 
Failure models 
4 Offshore Wind 
Energy 
Harvesting 
Civil & Infrastructure 
Engineering 
Offshore wind; wave environment; 
Fixed and floating offshore platforms; 
Wind load on structures; Coupled & 
uncoupled analysis; Fatigue analysis; 
Offshore wind turbine field design; 
Vessel-fleet optimization; Cost -
benefit evaluation; Power Ratio 
5 Power Plant 
Engineering 
  
 Mechanical 
Engineering 
Thermal power plant; Nuclear power 
plant; Hydroelectric power plant; 
Solar thermal power plant; Hybrid 
power plant; Plant layout, design and 
Infrastructure; Boilers; Condensers; 
Gas turbine; Wind turbines; Fuel cell; 
Plant load and efficiency; Tidal 
energy; Geothermal energy; 
Generator; Transformer; Energy  cost 
6 Energy Storage Electrical 
Engineering +  
Mechanical 
Engineering 
Energy storage; Thermal energy 
storage; Sensible and latent heat 
storage; Electrical energy storage; 
Capacitors and supercapacitors; 
Chemical and Electrochemical energy 
storage; Electrolysis; Batteries; 
Hydrogen storage; Mechanical energy 
storage; Flywheel; Pumped Hydro; 
Compressed air energy storage; 
Storage Applications; 
7 Smart Grid Electrical 
Engineering 
Smart Grid Basics; Energy 
Resources; 
Plug-in Electric Vehicle (PEV); 
Demand-side management; 
Monitoring and Protection 
8 Biomass 
Energy 
Conversion 
 
Chemical and 
Engineering + 
Bioscience and 
Bioengineering 
Biofuels and bio power; Biomass 
characteristics; Pre -treatment and 
processing; Gasification; Pyrolysis; 
Anaerobic fermentation; Biogas 
7 
 
production; Bioreactors; Process 
kinetics; Algal biofuels; Microbial fuel 
cell; Hydrogen production; Artificial 
photosynthesis 
9 Hydrogen and 
Methanol 
Economy 
Chemical 
Engineering  
Hydrogen and methanol as fuels; 
Economic, Environmental, 
Sustainability aspects; Production of 
hydrogen and  methanol as fuel; 
Challenges and opportunities; 
Infrastructure and logistics of 
Hydrogen and methanol production 
10 Plugin Electric 
Vehicles 
Electrical 
Engineering 
Introduction to EV; Powertrain 
Storage systems; Charging 
Infrastructure; Vehicle-to-X systems; 
Hybrid Electric Vehicle; Vehicle 
Communication; PEV integration 
11 Transmission 
Infrastructure 
Electrical 
Engineering 
Overhead transmission lines; 
Underground cables; Marine cables 
12 Environmental 
Aspects of 
Power Plant 
Civil & Infrastructure 
Engineering 
Types of pollutants; Emission 
standards; Gasification; Combustion; 
Particulate matter control; Flue gas 
desulfurization; Types of ash; ash 
handling; Sustainable practices  
13 Fuel Cell 
Technology 
Chemical 
Engineering 
Basic principle of Fuel cell technology; 
Kinetics of Fuel cell electrodes; 
Charge and mass transport; Modeling 
and characterization of fuel cell; 
Principles of proton exchange 
membrane 
14 Electrochemical 
Conversion and 
Storage  
Chemical 
Engineering 
Introduction to electrochemical 
Conversion and Storage; Introduction 
to battery and Electrochemical 
supercapacitor; Principles of 
electrodialysis; Electrochemical 
mechanism of Hydrogen production 
15 Advanced 
Waste Water 
Treatment 
Chemical 
Engineering 
Introduction to Waste water 
engineering; Principles of 
Conventional Waste Water 
Treatment; Aerobic and Anaerobic 
processes; Mechanism of Advanced 
Treatment; Different unit operations 
for water recycling and reuse 
16 Selected Topics 
in Distributed 
Generations 
Electrical 
Engineering 
Distributed generation introduction; 
Control of distributed generation 
Microgrids; Stability Challenges in 
grid integration; Ancillary services 
17 Hydropower  Mechanical 
Engineering  
+  
Electrical 
Engineering 
+   
Civil & Infrastructure 
Engineering  
Large scale hydropower; Hydropower 
turbines; Tidal power; Hydropower 
generators; Small Hydropower; 
Pumped storage hydropower; 
Hydropower house; Site 
investigation; Design of embankment 
dams; Concrete face rockfill dams; 
Concrete gravity dams; Foundation 
preparation 
18 Materials for 
Electrochemical 
energy 
Conversion and 
Storage 
Metallurgical & 
Materials 
Engineering + 
Physics 
Electrochemical energy storage; 
Conversion devices; Types of 
batteries; Battery capacity and life; 
Materials for batteries; 2D and 3D 
batteries; Principle and types of fuel 
8 
 
cells; Performance of fuel cells; Types 
of solid oxide fuel cells; Hydrogen 
storage; capacitor and 
supercapacitors; Challenges and 
applications 
19 Energy 
Economics and 
policy 
Humanities & Social 
Sciences 
Energy resources; Energy 
accounting; Demand analysis; 
Demand and load management 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
Course Content of Program Core Course (PC) 
 
Title Introduction to Sustainable 
Infrastructure Engineering 
Number CIE7XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P-Th 
[C] 
3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech/M. Tech-PhD Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite B.Tech Degree 
 
Objectives: This course aims at  
1. Presenting elements and components of sustainable infrastructure creation and 
management. 
2. Introducing practices of water management, greenhouse gas reduction, and green 
city planning. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will acquire- 
1. Fundamentals and principles of sustainable engineering design. 
2. Knowledge of existing frameworks to achieve long-term sustainability.   
3. Methods and techniques for waste water management and greenhouse gas emission 
reduction.  
4. Knowledge on the engineering and architectural aspects overall green city planning. 
 
Content: 
● Process of sustainable engineering design: key principle of sustainability; Integration 
of architecture and engineering; design drivers for sustainable infrastructure system; 
implementation. 
● Sustainable infrastructure framework:  Green building rating system; sustainable 
infrastructure frameworks: pillars of sustainability, scale-density framework, transect, 
built form-ecology framework. 
● Water conservation and supply: water management plans; ac hieving water balance; 
analyzing water resources; water supply strategies. 
● Integrated water management:  integrated stormwater management; urban 
stormwater treatment strategies; constraints and barriers to implementation; 
graywater treatment and reuse; integrating graywater into a water resources master 
plan; blackwater management approaches. 
● Energy and greenhouse gases:  reducing demand by design; designing sustainable 
power supplies; addressing climate change and reducing carbon footprint; policy 
measures f or increasing energy security and efficiency; design guidelines and 
performance standards. 
● Sustainable site planning, built systems, and material flows: sustainable site planning; 
green streets and transportation network; working with the land; material an d waste 
flows. 
● City-scale approach: Case study1 (Guangzhou: city -scale transformation in China); 
Case study 2 (Tianjin: Eco -city master plan); Case -study 3 (PlaNYC: integrated 
stormwater approach); Case study 4 (San Francisco city greening initiative) 
●  
Reference Books 
1. S. Bry Sarté (2010) Sustainable Infrastructure. John Wiles & Sons, Inc. ISBN 978 -0-
470-91293-5. 
Learning Material 
 
 
 
  
10 
 
 
Detailed Course Content of Specialization Stream Courses (SSE) 
 
Title Biomass Energy Conversion Course BBXX 
Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-2 [4] 
Offered for  M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type SSE 
Prerequisite       
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Illustrate the principles and applications of bio-energy harnessing systems ranging 
from conventional processes to the latest developments in the area. 
  
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Have an understanding of the existing and emerging biomass to energy technologies. 
2. Utilize the knowledge of bioenergy systems while integrating bioenergy with other 
renewable energy systems. 
3. Suggest potential solutions for energy needs by incorporating bioenergy technology.   
   
Contents 
Bioenergy context:  Introduction, Biofuels and biopower; automobile and biofuels, 
feedstocks (harvested and residual), Emissions from biofuels [Lecture 6]. 
  
Thermochemical biomass conversion:  Chemical composition, Biomass types and 
characteristics, Biomass pre-treatment and processing, Combustion, Gasification, Pyrolysis, 
Catalytic conversion of biomass to liquid biofuels, Life cycle analysis [Lecture 14]. 
  
Biochemical biomass conversion: Anaerobic fermentation technology: Biogas production, 
process microbiology, different types of bioreactors, basic process kinetics, Various types of 
biofuels,1st and 2nd generation biofuels, Algal Biofuels, ASTM standards for biofuels, 
Engineered microbes for biofuel [Lecture 10]. 
  
Bioelectrochemical systems: Introduction to Microbial Fuel cells (MFC), Nernst equation 
and electrochemical potential difference, t he redox reactions, calculating and measuring 
potentials, The exoelectrogenic microbes, MFC components, Applications of MFC, Bio 
electrochemical system for Hydrogen production, Artificial photosynthesis  [Lecture 12]. 
  
Lab: Biomass acid treatment process and estimation of reducing sugars, performing ethanol 
fermentation and determine ethanol yield and productivity, performing butanol 
fermentation, setting up a biogas production process, Screening cellulose producers from 
natural environments, enzyme activit y assays for lignocellulosic waste, performing acid 
catalysed/base catalysed biodiesel production -comparison of process kinetics, determine 
biodiesel yield with sequential base/acid treatment for free fatty acid rich microbial oil, 
Setting up Microbial fuel cells, 
  
Textbooks 
1.  German Solar Energy Society, Ecofys, (2006) Planning and installing bioenergy 
systems: A guide for installers, architects and engineers, Earthscan, 
2.  Vertes, A. A., Qureshi, A., Yukawa, H.,  Blaschek, H.P.,(2010) Biomass to 
Biofuels, Wiley. 
3.  H. S. Mukunda, Understanding Clean Energy and Fuels from Biomass, Wiley India 
Pvt. Ltd., 2011. 
  
Reference Books 
1.    Stanier, R. Y., (2009) General Microbiology, W.H. Freeman and Co. 
2.    Pelczar, M.J., Chan, E. C. S., Krieg, N.R.,(2001) Microbiology, Tata McGraw - Hill 
Education 
  
Online course material 
11 
 
Michelle O'Malley,  Fueling Sustainability: Engineering Microbial Systems for Biofuel 
Production, Spring 2011, MIT OpenCourseWare Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, https://ocw.mit.edu. License: Creative Commons BY-NC-SA 
  
 
  
12 
 
 
Title Solar Energy and Applications Number MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-2 [4] 
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type SSE  
Prerequisite B.Tech Degree 
 
Objectives 
This course has objectives- 
1. to familiarize students with the potential of solar energy to meet the growing energy 
demands of society in a sustainable way, 
2. to elaborate students, the concepts of solar energy applications in architecture and 
infrastructure, and 
3. to illustrate solar technologies of producing power and cooling/heating in buildings.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will acquire- 
1. knowledge of various means of solar energy  utilization technologies and their 
applications. 
2. ability to model, design and evaluate solar energy systems and their applications from 
the fundamental principles and methods.  
3. practical exposer to various measurement experiments and simulation of applica tions. 
 
Content: 
Solar Radiation: Introduction to Solar Radiation, distribution, measurement and data, Sun 
motion, Introduction to Detectors, Radiation on Sloped Surfaces, Principle of conversion of 
solar radiation into heat, Thermal comfort, Introduction to Concentrated Solar Power (CSP) 
Technologies. [Lectures 14] 
 
Photovoltaics: Photovoltaic (PV) Effect, PV cells, The electrical model of PV cells, effect of 
shading, converters for grid integration of solar PV: DC -DC boost converter and inverter, 
control of boost converter and inverter, MPPT techniques and implementation. Mounting of 
solar panels, design and analysis of solar trees. [Lectures 14] 
  
Energy Efficient Buildings:  Building orientation and design, passive heating and cooling 
concepts, thumb rule s, heat transfer in buildings: Thermal modeling of passive concepts, 
Evaporative cooling, Energy efficient windows and daylighting, Earth air tunnel and heat 
exchanger, Zero energy building concept and rating systems, Energy conservation building 
codes, Software for Building Simulation, Automation and Energy Management of Buildings.  
[Lectures 14] 
 
Laboratory Classes [12-13 Classes] 
Experiments: Measurement of solar radiation, Measurement of -emissivity, reflectivity, 
transmittivity, Performance testing of fo rced flow & thermosyphon systems, Performance 
testing of - solar air heater, dryer, desalination unit, solar flat plate collector, solar 
concentrators, Testing and characterization solar PV. 
Computational hands-on: Simulation of- Heating and cooling of buildings, Hot water storage 
system, Heat exchangers, Grid integration of Solar PV, etc. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Solar Engineering of Thermal Processes. John A. Duffie, William A. Beckman. John, 
Fourth Edition, Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2013. 
2. Renewable Energy Resources: Basic Principles and Applications. G. N. Tiwari, M K. 
Ghosal, Narosa Publishing House, New Delhi, 2004.  
3. M.S. Sodha, N.K. Bansal, P.K. Bansal, A. Kumar, and M.A.S.Malik, Solar Passive Building, 
Science and Design, Pergamon Press, 1986. 
4. Masters,G.M., (2004), Renewable and Efficient Electric Power Systems , John Wiley & 
Sons, Inc.  
 
Learning Material 
4. Solar Energy Technology https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112/105/112105051/ 
13 
 
5. Solar Photovoltaics Fundamentals, Technology And Applications 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/115/107/115107116/ 
 
  
14 
 
 
Title Wind turbine and field design Number CIE7XX0 
Department Civil Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–2 [4] 
Offered for B. Tech, M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type SSE 
Prerequisite       
 
Objectives 
1. To provide high-level insight into the technical and engineering aspects of wind energy. 
2. To develop understanding of advanced principles of aerodynamics and structural 
mechanics used in design of wind turbine. 
Learning Outcomes  
The students will have understanding of: 
1. Wind turbine dynamic system behavior with integrated components and their cont rol for 
a given application. 
2. Computing performance characteristics of the main components of wind turbine.  
3. Wind turbine blade aerodynamics to predict force components and moments experienced 
by modern wind turbines. 
Contents 
Wind power: Introduction to wind power: Maximum rated power, power coefficient, average 
annual power from a wind turbine, wind speed relationships based on the Beaufort scale, wind 
turbine protection from the wind, total energy from the wind, energy content, geographical 
resource dis tribution, influence of terrain, measurement methods and statistical analysis.  
(Lectures: 10) 
 
Aerodynamics: Fluid flow concept, 2-D Aerodynamics, 3-D aerodynamics. (Lectures: 12) 
 
Turbines: Introduction and Evolution of wind turbines, classification and s tatus and basic 
anatomy of wind turbines, design of turbine rotor blades, HAWTs, VAWTs, Betz and Glaurets 
turbine theories and the BEM method, Horizontal and vertical axis wind turbines (HAWTs and 
VAWTs), blades, choice of materials and adaptation to diffe rent climates, aeroelasticity and 
Wind turbine modelling. (Lectures: 10) 
 
Controls: Control mechanisms, control targets, control strategies (pitch and stall regulation). 
(Lectures: 10)  
 
Laboratory: Modelling of (a) drivetrain (b) stress generation on wind  blades (c) Flow 
Modelling Around a Wind Turbine; (d) neck and welding points stress modelling  
 
Textbook 
1. J. F. Maxwell, J. G. McGowan, and A. L. Rogers, Wind Energy Explained – Theory, 
Design, and Applications, John Wiley & Sons, 2010, ISBN: 978-0-47001500-1. 
2. Martin O. L. Hansen, Aerodynamics of Wind Turbines, Second edition, Earthscan, UK, 
2008. 
 
 
  
15 
 
 
Title Offshore Tidal Energy Harvesting Number CIE7XX0 
Department Civil Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech, M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type SSE 
Prerequisite  
Objectives 
1. Holistic introduction of different aspects of a tidal energy system. 
2. Introduction of design principles and size optimization. 
3. Basics of control and reliability assessment of a tidal system. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Knowledge of prefeasibility assessment models. 
2. Knowledge of optimization techniques to increase efficiency of a tidal energy system. 
3. Different control system of a tidal current turbine. 
4. Knowledge of different failure models for reliability assessment. 
 
Content 
 
Introduction of tidal energy:  Principles and components of tidal power plants; Available 
technologies and concepts; Estimation of energy calculation; Tidal dynamics and structures 
of tidal currents. (Lectures: 6) 
 
Prefeasibility analysis: Analysis of location; Physical boundaries of assessment; Static v/s 
transect field survey; Location assessment: Farm method and Flux method. (Lectures: 6) 
 
Optimum sizing and modelling of tidal energy system : Modelling of tidal energy conversion 
systems; Numerical solution of tidal energy systems; Modelling of a tidal current turbine; 
Tidal energy facility size. (Lectures: 6) 
 
Hydrokinetic turbine: Basic principles; emerging designs: Unducted horizontal-axis turbines, 
Ducted horizontal-axis turbines, Unducted cross-flow turbines, Ducted cross -flow turbines, 
Gorlov helical turbine, Vortex -induced-vibration systems, Venturi systems, Oscillating 
hydrofoils, Paddle wheels, Flutter vane, Fan belt; Mooring systems and power transmission. 
(Lectures: 6) 
 
Control system: Automatic control system; Control strategies of ocean wave conversion 
systems; Reactive power control of tidal turbine; Dynamic control of tidal current turbine; 
Power system stability analysis. (Lectures: 6) 
 
Reliability assessment: The failure di stribution model; Constant failure rate model; Time 
dependent failure model; Assessment of tidal energy system by fault tree analysis. 
(Lectures: 6) 
 
Advances in tidal energy systems: Tidal energy system scenario: India and World; 
Environmental assessment;  Tidal harmonic analysis; Assessment of tidal energy system: 
Optimization technique and Game theory; Economic analysis. (Lectures: 6) 
 
Textbook  
1. Vikas Khare, Cheshta Khare , Savita Nema,   Prashant Baredar (2019). Tidal energy 
systems. Elsevier. ISBN: 978-0-12-814881-5. 
2. S. K. Chakrabarti (2021). Dynamics of floating offshore structures. World Scientific. 
ISBN: 9789814280563 
Other references: 
1. Lago LI, Ponta FL, Chen L (2010) Advances and trends in hydrokinet ic turbine 
systems. Energy for Sustainable Development. Volume 14, Issue 4, Pages 287 -296. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esd.2010.09.004. 
 
  
16 
 
 
Title Offshore Wind Energy Harvesting Number CIE7XX0 
Department Civil Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
1. To highlight the complexities of an offshore wind farms and differences with their 
onshore counterpart.  
2. To introduce the principles of an offshore wind farm design. 
3. To introduce principles of management and economics of a wind farm 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have understanding of: 
1. Aerodynamic, hydrodynamic, and structural loads on offshore wind structures. 
2. Design of fixed and floating platforms for wind turbines. 
3. Principles of designs of a wind firm, its control, and maintenance.  
4. Details of the life-cycle cost and economic feasibility study of an offshore wind farm. 
Contents  
The offshore environment: Atmospheric wind flow and its characteristic in the boundary layer, 
ocean winds, wave theories, wind and wave forces on offshore structures (Lectures: 7) 
Fixed and floating offshore platforms, their analysis, and design:  Fixed and floating offshore 
platforms, mooring lines-their dynamic analysis, wind forces on offshore structures, Design 
provisions in API and DNV codes, Fixed and floating offshore wind turbines -their dynamic 
analysis, coupled and uncoupled analysis, Fatigue consideration (Lectures: 8) 
Floating offshore wind turbines (FOWT):  OWT drivetrain and gearbox simulation; Dynamic 
behaviour of bearings on offshore wind turbine gearbox: Experimental characterization of 
OWT gearbox in operation. (Lectures: 7) 
Offshore wind turbine field design: Spatiotemporal wind resource assessment; Bathymetry 
and other sea constraints; Strategic planning; Offshore wind farm design; Large eddy 
simulation of wind farm aerodynamics. (Lectures: 7) 
Operation and Maintenance Modelling: Classification of models; State-of-the-art in modelling; 
Decision support tools: vessel -fleet optimization models, cost -benefit evaluation of remote 
inspection. (Lectures: 7) 
Life-cycle cost and economic feasibility of a floating offshore wind farm: Life-cycle cost 
calculation: Economic Map Tools and Restrictions Maps Tools; Life-cycle definition, breakdown 
structure of processes, and calculation of costs; CAPEX and OPEX; Net Present Value (NPV); 
Internal Rate of Return (IRR); Discounted Pay-Back Period (DPBP); Levelized Cost of Energy 
(LCOE); Cost of Power Ratio. (Lectures:7) 
 
Suggested Textbooks: 
1. Olimpo Anaya -Lara, John O. Tande, Kjetil Uhlen, Karl Merz (2018) Offshore Wind 
Energy Technology. Wiley. ISBN 9781119097785.  
2. Joao Cruz, Mairead Atcheson (2016). Floating offshore wind energy (1st Ed). Springer. 
ISBN 978-3-319-29398-1. 
3. Wiesław Ostachowicz, Malcolm McGugan, Jens-Uwe Schroder-Hinrichs, Marcin Luczak. 
MARE-WINT. New Materials and Reliability in Offshore Wind Turbine Technology . 
Springer Nature. ISBN 978-3-319-39034-9. 
4. Laura Castro -Santos, Vincente Diaz -Casas (2016) Floating Offshore Wind Farms . 
Springer. ISBN 978-3-319-27972-5.  
5. S. K. Chakrabarti (2021). Dynamics of floating offshore structures . World Scientific. 
ISBN: 9789814280563 
 
 
  
17 
 
 
Title Energy Storage Number EE7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–2 [4] 
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type SSE  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide understanding of various types of energy storage elements, their principle, 
characteristics, and applications 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Design suitable energy storage technology as per demand, location, cost and other 
parameters. 
2. Test and characterize various batteries/systems under different operating and 
      ambient conditions 
 
Contents  
 
Fractal - 1 
Energy Storage Systems:  Introduction of energy storage systems, Energy Demand, 
Energy Storage Methods and comparison. (4 Lectures) 
Thermal energy storage systems:  Basic Principle, Thermal energy storage methods, 
Sensible heat storage. (5 Lectures) 
Latent heat storage, phase -change materials, operational aspects, Cold thermal energy 
storage, Seasonal thermal energy storage (5 Lectures) 
 
Fractal - 2 
Mechanical energy storage systems: Introduction, Flywheel energy storage -design and 
components (4 Lectures) 
Pumped hydropower storage (3 Lectures) 
Compressed-air energy storage- Specifications of components, classification. (4 Lectures)  
Applications, Technical characteris tics in terms of power rating and discharge time, 
storage duration, energy efficiency, energy density, cycle life, lifetime, capital cost, etc. 
(3 Lectures) 
 
Fractal - 3 
Electrochemical/chemical energy storage : Introduction, rechargeable batteries and thei r 
electrochemistry, types of batteries - integration into electrical grids, performance, 
characteristics, off-grid systems - sizing - small scale battery storage systems, recycling 
technologies, battery testing, battery management, regulations and safety aspects of high 
voltage batteries, hydrogen energy storage Hydrogen economy, fuel cell, safety (11 
lectures) 
Electrical energy storage: Superconducting magnetic energy storage systems - principles, 
materials, performance, and characteristics, super capacitors (3 lectures) 
 
Laboratory Classes [12-13 Classes] The experiments for the course include: 
Measurement of internal resistance, cold-cranking amps, capacity, state of health, charging 
efficiency; Charging and discharging characteristics; Testing of stater -batteries; Self -
discharge and storage; Effect of temperature on – voltage, capacity, internal resistance, self-
discharge, life; Centralized, distributed, hybrid cell balancing; Design and simulation of  
charge controllers for battery; Simulation of battery management system; Simulation of 
different models using different software like Siemens Simcenter battery; design studio, 
Matlab.  
Textbook  
1. Cabeza,L.F., (2015), Advances in Thermal Energy Storage Sy stems: Methods and 
Applications, Woodhead Publishing 
2. Kalaiselvam,S., Parameshwaram R., (2014), Thermal Energy Storage for 
Sustainability-Systems Design, Assessment and Applications, Academic Press 
18 
 
3. Alami,A.H., (2020), Mechanical Energy Storage for Renewable and Sustainable Energy 
Resources, Springer 
4. Huggins,R.A., (2014), Energy Storage-Fundamentals, Materials and Applications, 2nd 
edition, Springer 
 
Self Learning Material 
 
 
 
 
  
19 
 
 
Title Power Plant Engineering Number MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3-0-2 [4] 
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type SSE 
Prerequisite B.Tech  
Objectives 
This course is designed- 
1. to introduce different aspects of power plant engineering such as power plant layout, 
operation and safety principles  
2. to provide knowledge of the working principle of conversion of different energy 
resources into electrical power generation. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will acquire-  
1. ability to select an appropriate type of power plant for given requirements under 
different situations 
2. skills for optimization of energy efficiency of power plants with respect to available 
resources and energy requirements. 
3. ability to analyze the working and layout of power plants and the various components 
comprising the plant. 
 
Content: 
Introduction to power plant engineering: Sources of energy, National and International status 
on power generation. (Lectures: 2) 
Thermal Power Plant:  Plant layout, Thermal power plant equipment, Types of boilers, the 
performance of boilers, supercritical steam generator, the performance of condensers, types 
of steam turbines, draught system. (Lectures: 8) 
Gas Turbine Power Plant: Classification and construction layout, Principles of closed and open 
cycle gas turbines. (Lectures: 4) 
Combined cycle power plants:  Load type and calculation, Load variation, Use of internal 
combustion engine plant, Plant layout and design calculation, combined cycle efficiency.  
(Lectures: 5) 
Nuclear power plant: Principles of nuclear energy, Elements of nuclear power plants, Types 
of nuclear fuel, nuclear reactor, Boiling Water Reactor, Pressurised Water Reactor, 
Pressurised Heavy Water Reactor, Fast breeder reactors, Next generation nuclear plant.  
(Lectures: 6) 
Hydroelectric power plant:  Plant layout, water turbine, plant operation, water storage and 
flow duration, hydrographs, Low, medium and high head plants, pumped storage plants, 
Penstock, water hammer, surge tanks, gates and valves, power house. (Lectures: 6) 
Site selection: Selection of for power station, load estimation, load duration curve, load factor, 
capacity factor, use factor, diversity factor, demand factor, Effect of variable load on power 
plant, selection of the number and size of units. (Lectures: 4) 
Economics and  Environmental Considerations: Capital cost, Cost of energy production, 
Operational cost of power plants, tariffs for electrical energy, Environmental impact, different 
types of pollution, fuel availability. (Lectures: 3) 
Electrical components of power pla nts: generator, transformer, speed governing systems, 
generator excitation systems, switchyard. (Lectures: 4) 
 
Laboratory Classes [12-13 Classes] 
Steam Power Plant: Start-up, Operation and maintenance, Shut down of Steam Power Plant, 
Control and monitoring. 
Boilers: Efficiency of a steam generator, Analysis of exhaust gas from boiler, Determination 
of the heat flux density and the overall heat transfer coefficient in boilers.  
Steam Turbine: Demonstration of the function of a steam turbine, Operating Charac teristics 
of Steam turbine. 
Cooling tower: Determination of cooling capacity, Operating Characteristics of Cooling tower   
20 
 
Gas Turbine: Determination of specific fuel consumption, Determination of Shaft power and 
System efficiency.  
 
Reference Books 
1. M. M. Ei-Wakil, Power Plant Technology, Tata McGraw-Hill. 
2. P. K. Nag, Power Plant Engineering, Tata McGraw-Hill. 
3. F. T. Morse, Power Plant Engineering, D. Van Nostran, New York. 
 
Learning Material 
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112107291/  
 
 
  
21 
 
 
Title Smart Grid Number EE7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P 
[C] 
3–0–2 [4] 
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type SSE 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide concepts and topics that are relevant to smart grid technologies to facilitate 
exploring research opportunities 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the basic concepts of smart grid development and the critical technologies that 
underpin such development, their basic principles, physical constraints, and technological 
potentials 
 
Contents  
 
Smart Grid Basics: Evolution of Electric Power Grid and Smart Grid, Objectives, main features 
and challenges of smart grid (5 lectures) 
Energy Resources: Centralized vs. distributed generation (1 lecture); renewable energy: 
solar, wind, hydropower, biomass, geothermal, ocean wave; benefit, costs, and policies of 
renewable energy (5 lectures); renewable sources integration – overcoming intermittence; 
storage systems technology (4 lectures) 
Plug-in Electric Vehicle (PEV):  History of EV; PEV challenges and potential solutions (1 
lecture); EV and electric power grid; PEV charging infrastructure, challenges and solutions (4 
lectures); PEV as an energy storage device and an energy source (V2G) (2 lectures)  
Demand-side management: Load profile of the power grid; market pricing (3 lectures); peak 
shaving and valley filling; load forecasting (4 lectures); regulations and policies (3 lectures)  
Monitoring and Protection:  Wide-area monitoring system (WAMS), SCADA and PMU (4 
lectures); advanced metering infrastructure (AMI); smart metering (3 lectures); 
communication infrastructure and technologies (3 lectures) 
 
Laboratory: Experiments related to the following topics will be conducted under laboratory 
component: Characteristics of solar PV, grid integration of renewable energy sources, effect 
of loads on power quality with renewable energy penetration, Inverter -based microgrid, 
virtual inertia in inverter -based sources, demand side management, contribution of energy 
storage systems to enhance power quality, ancillary services, smart metering, performance 
of PMU 
 
Textbook  
1. Bollean,M.H.J., Hasan,F., (2011), Integration of Distributed Generation in the Power 
Systems, Willey-IEEE India Press 
2. Ehsani,M., Gao,Y., Gay,S.E., Emadi,A., (2005), Modern Electric, Hybrid Electric, and Fuel 
Cell Vehicles: Fundamentals, Theory, and Design, CRC Press 
3.  Bansal,R., (2019), Power System Protection in Smart Grid Environment, CRC Press 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. The Smart Grid: An Introduction, 
 http://www.oe.energy.gov/SmartGridIntroduction.htm, Department of Energy, 2008.  
 
 
  
22 
 
 
Title Hydrogen and Methanol Economy Number CH7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 
Offered for MTech, MTech-PhD, PhD Type SSE 
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide in -depth knowledge about Hydrogen and Methanol production, storage, their  
Utility and infrastructure development. 
2. Impart knowledge about the economic and environmental viewpoint of using Hydrogen 
and Methanol as fuel sources.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have: 
1. Proper knowledge about Hydrogen and Methanol production and related issues.  
2. Economic view point of Hydrogen and Methanol as fuel and the related challenges & 
opportunities. 
 
Contents  
Hydrogen and methanol as fuels:  General aspects, Prelude to energy systems, Hydrogen 
and Methanol as energy sources, Future energy supply, Economy and Environment, 
Sustainability (Lectures: 6) 
Hydrogen Production Processes:  Properties, production , storage, utilization and safely, 
Infrastructure requirement, Hydrogen as a transportation fuel, Hydrogen based fuel cell. 
(Lectures: 12) 
Methanol Production Processes:  Properties, production, storage, transportation and safely, 
Infrastructure Requirement, Methanol as fuel and energy carrier, Methanol as automobile, 
marine and aviation fuel. (Lectures: 14) 
Challenges and opportunities: Indian and global perspectives, Domestic and transportation 
application, Affordable Technology development, Policy. (Lectures: 6) 
Infrastructure and other issues: Storage and transmission infrastructure, Local distribution, 
filling stations and building integrated systems, national and international safety standards, 
socio-economic implications. (Lectures: 6) 
 
Textbook  
1. G. A. Olah, A. Goeppert, G.  K. S. Prakash,(2006),  Beyond Oil and Gas: The Methanol 
Economy, Wiley‐VCH, Weinheim, Germany. 
2. Ball M. and Wietschel M.,(2009) The Hydrogen Economy Opportunities and Challenges ,  
Cambridge University Press. 
 
Reference Books  
1. Scipioni, A. Manzardo, J. Ren, (2017)  Hydrogen Economy: Supply Chain, Life Cycle  
Analysis and Energy Transition for Sustainability, Academic Press. 
2. M. Bertau, H. Offermanns, L. Plass, F. Schmidt, H. Wernicke,(2014) Methanol: The Basic  
Chemical and Energy Feedstock of the Future, Springer; 2014 
3. Bent Sorensen, 2012, Hydrogen and Fuel Cells: Emerging Technologies and    
Applications, Elsevier, Second Edition. 
 
 
 
  
23 
 
 
Title Plugin Electric Vehicles Number EE7XX0 
Departmen
t 
Electrical Engineering L-T-P[C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type SSE  
Prerequisit
e 
   
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide understanding of various technologies of plugin electric vehicle and 
hybrid electric vehicle and their role in smart grid operation 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Design powertrain circuit topology and appropriate control scheme for electric 
vehicle 
2.  Understand and design EV charging infrastructure 
 
Contents  
 
Introduction to EV : Recent development trends, types of electric vehicles (2 
lectures) 
Powertrain: Concepts of powertrain sizing in EV and PHEV, starting, braking (6 
lectures) 
Storage systems : Battery types, parameters, battery modeling, battery 
management (5 lectures) 
Charging Infr astructure: Domestic charging infrastructure, public charging 
infrastructure, normal charging station, occasional charging station, fast charging 
station, battery swapping station (5 lectures), types of charging: constant voltage, 
constant current, pulse charging, inductive, conductive charging (3 lectures) 
Vehicle-to-X systems : Vehicle -to-grid, vehicle -to-home (5 lectures), vehicle -to-
building, vehicle-to-vehicle (3 lectures) 
Hybrid Electric Vehicle : Configuration of HEV (series, parallel, series -parallel & 
complex), power flow control in HEV configurations, control (6 lectures) 
Vehicle Communication: Introduction to in -vehicle communications and controller 
area network (4 lectures) 
PEV integration: Impact on transmission and distribution network (3 lectures) 
Laboratory: Experiments related to the following topics will be conducted under 
laboratory component: SoC  estimation, control of electric vehicle drives, 
regenerative braking, powertrain and vehicle dynamics, EV chargers and their 
control, vehicle-to-grid technology, vehicle-to-vehicle technology, EV charging from 
solar PV, performance of aggregator 
 
Laboratory: Experiments related to the following topics will be conducted under 
laboratory component: 
SoC estimation, control of electric vehicle drives, regenerative braking, powertrain 
and vehicle dynamics, EV chargers and their control, vehicle -to-grid technology, 
vehicle-to-vehicle technology, EV charging from solar PV, performance of 
aggregator, Use of simulation tools (MATLAB, SIEMENS EV related softwares) to 
simulate different subsystems of EV and different scenarios. 
 
Textbook  
1. Husain,I., (2011), Electric and Hybrid Vehicles Design Fundamentals , 2 nd 
Edition, CRC Press 
2. Ehsani,M., Gao,Y., Emadi,A., (2011), Modern Electric, Hybrid Electric, and Fuel 
Cell Vehicles Fundamentals, Theory and Design, 2nd Edition, CRC Press 
3. Larminie,J., Lowry,J., (2003), Electric Vehicle Technology Explained, Wiley 
 
Self Learning Material 
24 
 
1. Jain,A.K.,  Electric Vehicles - Part 1,  NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Electrical Engineering, IIT Delhi, 
     https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/102/108102121/ 
2. Kumar,P., Majhi,S., Introduction to Hybrid and Electric Vehicles,  NPTEL Course 
Material, Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, IIT 
Guwahati, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/103/108103009/ 
     
 
  
25 
 
 
Title Energy Economics and 
Policy 
Number HSS7XX0 
Department Humanities and Social Sciences L-T-P-D [C] 1-0-0 [1] 
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type SSE 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
 
1. To introduce basics of energy economics and demands. 
  
Learning Outcomes  
 
1. Knowledge of energy classification, calculation, and audit. 
2. Knowledge of demand analysis and management. 
 
Contents 
 
1. Energy as economic resources: classification of energy resources; measurement of 
energy; energy accounting. (Lectures: 7) 
2. Energy demand: basic concepts in economics; descriptive analysis of energy 
demand; decomposition analysis and parametric approach; demand side 
management; load management. (Lectures: 7) 
Text Books 
1. Alessandro Rubino Alessandro Sapio Massimo La Scala Michelle Hallack (2020) 
Handbook of Energy Economics and Policy (1st Ed). Elsevier Academic Press. ISBN: 
9780128147122. 
 
Online course Material 
1. “Energy Economics and policy” by Prof. Shyamasree Dasgupta on NTPEL. 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/109/106/109106161/ 
 
  
26 
 
 
Title Materials for Electrochemical Energy 
Conversion and Storage  
Number  
Department Physics and Metallurgical & Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 2-0-0 [2] 
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type SSE 
Prerequisite -   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide the student with an extended knowledge of the basic principles and recent 
advances in Energy Storage materials and associated technologies for consumer electronics 
to high-power applications. 
2. Provide the students with the role of materials in energy storage technologies.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to gain knowledge on: 
1.  Different modes of energy conversion and storage with respect to scale, cost, energy and 
power density  
2.  Structure processing property performance relationship of the energy materials developed 
over time.  
 
Contents 
Introduction: Overview of electrochem ical energy storage and conversion devices, Basic 
terminology, Classification, Applications. (Offered by Physics) (Lectures: 2) 
Batteries: Introduction to Batteries, primary and secondary batteries, Solid -state and liquid 
electrolyte batteries, Lead acid b atteries, Nickel Cadmium Batteries, Li -ion and Li -Polymer 
batteries, Intercalation and Conversion Materials, Battery Capacity and Life, Micro -batteries, 
Thin film batteries, Materials for high-energy density 2D and 3D batteries (Offered by Physics) 
(Lectures: 12) 
Fuel cells: Principle and types, performance characteristics and efficiency of fuel cell, Proton 
exchange fuel cells, Solid oxide fuel cells, Types of solid oxide fuel cells: High and intermediate 
temperature, Single chamber solid oxide fuel cells.  Polymer electrolyte fuel cells, Acid/alkaline 
fuel cells, phosphoric acid fuel cell, molten carbonate fuel cell, fuel cell stack, hydrogen storage 
(Offered by MT) (Lectures: 10) 
Supercapacitors: Difference between Capacitor and Supercapacitor , Electrolyte and Electrode 
materials, electric double layer capacitors, Challenges and Applications (Offered by MT)  
(Lectures: 4) 
 
 
Textbook  
1. Cheong K. Y., Impellizzeri G and  Fraga M. A. (2018) Emerging Materials for Energy 
Conversion and Storage, 1st Edition, Elsevier 
 
Reference Book 
1. Rosen M. A. (2012) Energy Storage, Nova 
 
Online Course Materials  
1. Prof. Bazant M., MITopencourseware: Electrochemical Energy Systems, MIT Course Number 
10.626 / 10.426, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/chemical-engineering/10-626-
electrochemical-energy-systems-spring-2014/  
 
2. Prof. Pal K., Selection Of Nanomaterials For Energy Harvesting And Storage Application , 
NPTEL Course Material, Mechanical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112/107/112107283/ 
 
  
27 
 
 
Title Hydropower Number MEL7XX0 
Departmen
t 
Mechanical Engineering, electrical 
Engineering, Civil & Infrastructure 
Engineering 
L-T-P[C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type SSE 
Prerequisit
e 
   
 
Objectives:  
The Instructor will: 
1. Describe the role of the hydropower and working principles of small - and large-scale 
hydropower plants.  
2. Provide overview of the practical design of hydropower structures including mechanical 
and electrical equipment. 
3. Introduce students to geotechnical, mechanical, and electrical engineering aspects of 
conventional large dams. 
 
Learning Outcomes:  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Formulate and an alyze technical solutions for design, and operation of hydropower 
plants. 
2. Analyze a technical problems connected to the hydroelectric power industry. 
3. Compare the design of dams, mechanical, electric and electronic equipment.  
4. Implement design details of emb ankment dam, components of face rockfill dams and 
concrete gravity dam, and basis of dam foundation design. 
 
Fractal 1 (ME) 
 Introduction: Hydropower resource, potential and market, Hydropower sites, Types of 
hydropower plants. (Lectures: 2) 
 Large hydropower: Run -of-River Hydropower, Dams and Barrages, Dam types 
(Lectures: 3)  
 Hydropower turbines, Classification and working principles, Impulse and reaction 
turbines; Propeller and Kaplan Turbines, Deriaz turbine. (Lectures: 5)  
 Tidal power: Tidal barrage power plant, operation and design,  Tidal lagoons, Barrage 
construction techniques, Turbine speed regulation. (Lectures: 4) 
   
Fractal 2 (EE) 
 Hydropower Generators:  Generator poles and rotational speed, orientation, types 
(Lectures: 2) 
 Small Hydropower: Small, mini, and micro hydropower plant, generators for small 
hydro power plants (Lectures: 3) 
 Electronic Control of Hydropower: Phase angle control, relay switched on loads, Mark -
Space ratio controller (Lectures: 3) 
 Pumped Storage Hydropower : Pumped storage hydropower plant, turbines, motors 
(Lectures: 3) 
 Hydropower House: Classification, equipment, accessories, layout, components, sizing 
(Lectures: 3) 
 
Fractal 2 (CIE) 
● Site investigation techniques: Geological environments: rocks and soils; Geological, 
geotechnical, and geophysical investigation; Trenching and drilling (Lectures: 2) 
● Design of embankment dams: freeboard; Slope protection; Embankment crest details; 
Dimensioning and tolerances; Conduits through embankments; Flood control 
structures; Seismic stability analysis of embankments; Liquefaction of dam 
embankments and foundations. (Lectures: 4)  
● Concrete face rockfill dams and Concrete gravity dams: Selection of dam types; Rockfill 
zones; Concrete face; Construction aspects; Settlements, and displacements of the face 
slab, and joints; Leakage; Strength and compressibility of rock foundations; Strength 
of c oncrete in the dam; Strength of the concrete -rock contact; Silt and ice load 
(Lectures: 4) 
28 
 
● Foundation preparation: General foundation preparation for embankment dams; Cutoff 
foundation for embankment dams; Width and batter slopes; Slope modification; 
Foundation preparation for concrete gravity dams. (Lectures: 4) 
 
 
Textbook  
 Breeze,P., (2018), Hydropower, Academic Press 
 Pandey,B., Karki,A., (2017), Hydroelectric Energy, Renewable Energy and the 
Environment, CRC Press 
 Robin Fell, Patrick MacGregor, David Sta pledon, Graeme Bell (2005) Geotechnical 
Engineering of Dams. A. A. Balkema publishers. ISBN 04 1536 440 x. 
 
 
  
29 
 
 
Title Selected Topics in Distributed Generation Number EE7XX0 
Departmen
t 
Electrical Engineering L-T-P 
[C] 
3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type SSE  
Prerequisit
e 
   
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide salient concepts of DG operation and control in both grid connected and 
autonomous modes 
2.  Provide exposure to the challenges related to stability, grid integration, and ancillary 
services in distributed generation 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Develop control schemes for distributed generators to operate in grid connected and 
autonomous mode 
2. Understand various challenges and propose solutions related to stability, grid integration 
and ancillary services in distributed generation 
 
Contents  
 
Distributed generation: Introduction, DG types, concept of inertia and frequency response, 
flexibility issues, ramping issues (3 lectures) 
Control of distributed generation: Modelling and control of distributed energy sources such 
as solar PV, wind energy, diesel generator (10 lectures) 
Microgrids: Concept of microgrid, microgrid benefits, typical structures and configurations 
of various microgrids (3 lectures), control of converters in DC and AC microgrids (4 
lectures), active and reactive power control, voltage and frequency control of inverter -
based sources (3 lectures), virtual synchronous generators (2 lectures) 
Stability: Stability issues with weak grid integration and in microgrid operation (4 lectures) 
Other challenges in grid integration : Power quality requirements, DG support under 
abnormal grid conditions (3 lectures), issues related to islanding and reverse power flo w, 
network congestion (5 lectures), and protection (2 lectures) 
Ancillary services: Ancillary services with DGs, control for ancillary services, virtual power 
plants (3 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Bollean,M.H.J., Hasan,F., (2011), Integration of Distributed Generation in the Power 
Systems, Willey-IEEE India Press 
2. Masters,G.M., (2004), Renewable and Efficient Electric Power Systems , John Wiley & 
Sons, Inc. 
3.  Bevrani,H., Francois,B., Ise,T., (2017), Microgrid Dynamics and Control, John Wiley & 
Sons, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
30 
 
 
Title Advanced Waste Water 
Treatment  
Number CHL7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 3-0-2 (4) 
Offered for  M.Tech., M.Tech-Ph.D., Ph.D. Type SSE 
Prerequisite None   
Objective 
The instructor will:  
1 Impart comprehensive knowledge of industrial and municipal wastewater. 
1. Discuss mechanism and methodologies for waste water treatment. 
2. Discuss case studies 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the: 
1 Comprehensive knowledge of the wastewater treatment. 
1. Knowledge of advanced methodologies such as waste water management, recycle 
and reuse. 
Contents  
Introduction: Waste water engineering: an overview, characterisation of waste water and  
     monitoring of industrial and municipal waste water, environmental impacts of waste water  
     constituents. (4 lectures) 
Conventional Waste Water Treatment: Existing unit operations and processes, basic  
     philosophy of water treatment plants; physio-chemical treatment methods: (i) Screening,  
     (ii) conventional filtration (iii) coagulation, (iv) flocculation, (v) floatation (vi) Clari- 
     flocculation (vii) sedimentation, (viii) sand filtration, etc. (10 lectures) 
Aerobic and Anaerobic Suspended and Attached Growth Waste Water Treatment Processes:   
     Aerated lagoon, activated sl udge systems, trickling filter, sequential batch reactor, 
fluidized  
     bed bioreactors, Up-flow Anaerobic Sludge Blanket (UASB) and hybrid Up-flow Anaerobic  
     Sludge Blanket (UASB) reactors. (8 lectures) 
Advanced Treatment Processes: Membrane Filtration, reverse osmosis, ultrafiltration,  
     nanofiltration and electrodialysis; wet air oxidation, adsorption and ion -exchange; Wet- 
     land and root-zone treatment of industrial and municipal wastes; Design of sludge drying  
     beds, thermal and biological processes for sludge and land fillings. Membrane Reactors,  
     New Technologies for Waste Water Disinfection. (12 lectures) 
Water Recycling and Reuse: Different unit operations for water recycling depending on end  
     use, recovery of valuables from waste water, zero liquid discharge (ZLD). (8 lectures)  
 
Waste Water Treatment Design Lab (28 hrs) 
Clarifier; Aerator; Sand filtration system; Municipal waste water system; Grey water 
treatment system; Sewage water treatment system; Industrial waste water systems; Pond 
water treatment. 
 
Text Book 
1. Burton F.L., Tchobanoglous G., Stensel H.D., 2017, Waste Water Engineering 
Treatment and Reuse, 4thed.,Tata McGraw-Hill. 
2. Arceivala S.J. and Asolekar S.R., 2007, Wastewater Treatment for Pollution Control 
and Reuse, 3rd Ed., Tata McGraw Hill. 
Reference Books 
1. Henze M., van-Loosdrecht M.C.M., Ekama G.A. and Brdjanovic D., 2008, Biological 
Wastewater Treatment: Principles, Modelling and Design, IWA publishing. 
2. Sincero A.P. and Sincero G.A., 1996, Environmental Engineering – A Design 
Approach, Prentice-Hall. 
Online Course Material 
1. Tiwari M K, Wastewater treatment and recycling, NPTEL course material, 
Department of Civil Engineering, IIT Kharagpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105105178/ 
 
 
  
31 
 
 
Title Fuel Cell Technology Number CH7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type SSE 
Prerequisite None   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide in-depth knowledge about the fuel cell technology. 
2. Discuss the fundamentals of deferent fuel cells.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have: 
1. Comprehensive knowledge about fuel cell technology. 
2. The ability to design different types of cells. 
 
 
Contents  
Basics of Cell Technology: Principles of fuel cells, Fuel cells systems and staking, 
applications, performance study, electrochemistry and thermodynamics of fuel cells. [6 
lectures] 
 
Fuel cell kinetics : electrode kinetics, catalysis in fuel cells, activation energy, reac tion 
equilibrium, exchange currents and electrocatalysis, design principles of catalyst-electrode, 
Sabatier principle. [6 lectures] 
 
Charge and mass transport : resistance and voltage loss, electrical driving force, fuel cell 
electrolytes, diffusive and conductive transport, convective transport. [6 lectures] 
 
Modelling and characterization: Theory and governing equations, basic fuel cell model, 1D 
model, CFD application in modelling, characterization techniques of fuel cells, physical and 
chemical methods. [6 lectures]   
 
Proton-exchange membrane (PEM) Fuel Cell : Cell components, material properties and 
processes; membrane layer, current collector and gas delivery, catalyst action, design 
issues, high temperature and reverse operation, degradation and lifetime. [9 lectures] 
 
Other Fuel cells: Solid Oxide Fuel Cell(SOFC), Phosphoric acid fuel cell (PAFC), Alkaline fuel 
cell (AFC), Solid acid fuel cell (SAFC), Molten-carbonate fuel cell (MCFC), Microbial fuel cell, 
etc., Environmental impact of fuel cells, fuel  cell vehicles, building-integrated fuel cells. [9 
lectures] 
 
Textbook  
1. Andrew L. Dicks, David A. J. Rand, 2018, Fuel Cell Systems Explained , Willey, Third 
Edition. 
2. Ryan O'Hayre, Suk-Won Cha, Whitney Colella, Fritz B. Prinz, 2005, Fuel Cell 
Fundamentals, Willey, Third Edition. 
 
Reference Books  
1. Bent Sorensen, 2012, Hydrogen and Fuel Cells: Emerging Technologies and 
Applications, Elsevier, Second Edition. 
2. Frano Barbir, 2013, PEM Fuel Cells: Theory and Practice, Elsevier Inc., Second Edition. 
3. Ryan O'Hayre, Suk -Won Cha, Whitney Colella, Fritz B. Prinz, 2009, Fuel Cell 
Fundamentals, Wiley, Second Edition. 
 
  
32 
 
 
Title Electrochemical Conversion and Storage Number CH7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type SSE 
Prerequisite None   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Impart the knowledge of electrochemical engineering, Working principle, materials 
and characterization of electrochemical conversion for energy production. 
2. Introduce the mechanism to store energy. 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have: 
1. Comprehensive knowledge about electrochemical process. 
2. Advanced knowledge about energy production via electrochemical process and store 
it efficiently. 
 
Contents  
Introduction: basics of electrochemical Conversions and Storage, devices and Principles, 
over view of fuel cells, Photo-electrochemical conversion and cells. [5 lectures] 
 
Batteries for energy storage: primary and secondary batteries, limitations of batter y 
performance, Lead Acid Battery, Nickel -Metal Hydride (Ni -MH) Rechargeable Batteries, 
Lithium-Ion Rechargeable Batteries, Liquid- Redox Rechargeable Batteries. [10 lectures] 
 
Electrochemical supercapacitor: introduction to supercapacitor, types and struct ures, 
Transport Properties, electric double -layer capacitor, physical/elcrochemical processes in 
supercapacitors, diffuse layer, pseudocapacitor. [11 lectures] 
 
Electrodialysis: introduction to electrodialysis and reverse electrodialysis, control 
parameters, effect of flow structure. [4 lectures] 
 
Electrochemical Hydrogen Production: Introduction to electrolysis, electrolysers and 
hydrogen production, PEM water electrolysers, electrochemical reforming of alcohol, 
perspectives of hydrogen electroproduction techniques. [12 lectures] 
 
Textbook  
1. Vladimir S. Bagotsky, Alexander M. Skundin, Yurij M. Volfkovich, 2015, Electrochemical  
   Power Sources: Batteries, Fuel Cells, and Supercapacitors, Wiley. 
2. Jiujun Zhang, Lei Zhang, Hansan Liu, Andy Sun, Ru-Shi Liu, 2011, Electrochemical  
   Technologies for Energy Storage and Conversion, Wiley-VCH, First Edition. 
3. Allen J. Bard, Larry R. Faulkner, 2001, Electrochemical Methods: Fundamentals and  
   Applications, John Wiley & Sons, Second Edition. 
 
Reference Books  
1. Keith Scott, 2020, Electrochemical Methods for Hydrogen Production, RSC, UK. 
2. Stanley W. Angrist, 1982, Direct Energy Conversion , Allyn and Bacon Inc. 
 
 
  
33 
 
  
Title Environmental Aspects of 
Power Plant 
Number CIE7XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure 
Engineering 
L-T-P-D [C] 1-0-0 [1] 
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D., Ph.D. Type SSE 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
 
1. To provide basic knowledge of combustion and conversion technologies. 
2. To make students familiar with emissions, pre - and post -combustion control 
technologies and waste management techniques. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
 
The students are expected to achieve proficiency in: 
1. Identifying the issues and appropriately choose the right pollution control techniques 
for gas and particle phase emissions. 
2. Assessing the efficiency of conventional as well as emerging combustion technologies 
targeting pollution reduction. 
 
Contents 
Introduction: Types of emissions; types of pollutants (SOx, NOx , trace elements and 
other Coal Combustion Products) and their impacts; Emission standards (Lectures: 2) 
Combustion Technologies: Gasification; Types of gasifier; Gasification vs Combustion; 
Fluidized bed combustion (FBC); Concept of Integrated Gasificatio n Combined Cycle 
(ICC); IGCC vs pulverized coal combustion (PCC) (Lectures: 5) 
Pre- and Post -combustion control: Flue gas desulfurization (FGD); NOx and Sox 
treatments (low NOx burners, flue gas recirculation and SCR); Particulate matter control 
systems (Electrostatic precipitators, mechanical collectors, and other devices (particulate 
scrubbers, baghouse filters, fabric filters etc.)) (Lectures: 5) 
Ash handling: Ash (fly ash, bottom ash, pond ash, FBC ash, boiler slag, FGD ash); 
Scrubber slurry; Ash handli ng and sustainability practices, leaching aspects. (Lectures: 
2) 
 
Text Books 
1. Fuels and Fuel Technology, F. Peter, A. Wheatan & Co. Ltd., First Edition, 1965. 
2. Fuels and Combustion, S. Sarkar, Orient Longman, Second Edition, 1990. 
3. Hydrogen and Syngas Production and Purification Technologies, Ke Liu, C. Song, and 
V. Subramani, John Wiley & Sons, 2010. 
4. The Chemistry and Technology of Coal, J. G. Speight, CRC Press, 2013. 
 
Online course Material 
 
 
 
  
34 
 
 
Title Transmission Infrastructure Number EE7XX0 
Departmen
t 
Electrical Engineering L-T-P 
[C] 
3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type SSE  
Prerequisit
e 
Smart Grid   
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide knowledge related to infrastructure in various modes of power transmission 
such as underground, marine, and overhead. 
2. Provide knowledge related to design, installation, and maintenance of the transmission 
infrastructure. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Select appropriate transmission infrastructure needed for transmission of electric 
power based on various factors. 
2.  Design, install, and maintain power transmission infrastructure. 
 
Contents  
 
Overhead transmission lines : Overhead line routing, aerial survey, ground surve y, 
overhead line foundations, soil investigation, foundation types, foundation design, 
support structures, steel lattice towers, tower testing, overhead line fittings, suspension 
clamps, sag adjusters, bi-metal connectors, conductor loads, lightning, surge diverters, 
insulator arcing horn co-ordination, aerodynamic phenomena, transmission voltage level 
clearances, wooden poles, distribution voltage clearances, overhead line maintenance, 
environmental considerations (18 lectures) 
 
Underground cables : Types o f cable, insulation and conductor materials, air cable 
ampacity, underground cable ampacity, short circuit and its effect, thermal & 
electromechanical stresses, cable termination and joints, pulling the cable, installing 
cable racks, conduits, cable suppor ts, cable tray and trenches, cable testing, steps for 
fault location, fault location methods (12 lectures) 
 
Marine cables : Introduction, marine survey, cable routing, cable system design 
parameters, cable design parameters, cable accessories, cable install ation, cable 
materials & accessories, cable joints and terminations, inspections and testing, 
maintenance and failure investigation (12 lectures) 
 
 
Textbook  
1. Kiessling,F., Nefzger,P., Nolasco,J.F., Kaintzyk,U., (2003), Overhead Power Lines 
Planning Design Construction, 4th Edition, Springer 
2. Ganguli,S.K., Kohli,V., (2016), Power Cable Technology, CRC Press 
3. Worzyk,T., (2009), Submarine Power Cables Design, Installation, Repair, 
Environmental Aspects, Springer 
4. Bayliss,C., Hardy,B., (2012), Transmission and Distribution Electrical Engineering , 
4th Edition, Newnes publications 
 
 
Self Learning Material 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
Detailed Course Content of M. Tech Elective Courses (ME) 
 
Title Power System Protection Number EE7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P 
[C] 
3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type ME 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will provide knowledge of: 
1.  Various protection schemes and their applications in power industry 
2.  Relay coordination, instrument transformers 
3.  Numerical protection schemes based on signal processing techniques 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Design/propose protection schemes for various power system components based on 
digital signal processing 
2. Design relay coordination systems in distribution and transmission 
 
Contents  
 
Overview of Power System Protection:  Architecture of protection system, evolution of 
relays, zones of protections, concept of primary and back-up protection (2 lectures) 
Overcurrent Protection: Principles of fuse and overcurrent protection and application to 
feeder and motor protection, relay coordination in distribution system (6 lectures) 
Distance Protection:  Principles of distance relaying (2 lectures) and application to 
transmission system protection, relay coordination (5 lectures) 
Differential Protection: Principles of differential protection (2 lectures) and application to 
transformer, bus bar and generator armature winding protection (5 lectures) 
Introduction to Digital Relaying:  Sampling, concept of moving window, signal 
conditioning, signal processing (4 lectures) 
Instrument Transformer: Current and voltage transformers in power system protection 
(6 lectures) 
Circuit breakers:  Arc initiation and quenching, oil circuit breakers, air blast circuit 
breakers vacuum circuit breakers, SF6 circuit breakers (5 lectures), current chopping, 
reverse recovery voltage (3 lectures) 
Lightning arresters: Principle of operation and types (2 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Singh, L.P., (2017), Digital Protection: Protective Relaying from Electromechanical to 
Microprocessor, 2nd Edition, New Age International Publications 
2. Ram,B., Vishwakarma,D.N., (2017), Power System Protection and Switchgear , 2nd 
Edition, Tata McGraw Hill Publications. 
3. Phadke,A.G., Thorp,J.S., (2009), Computer relaying for Power System , 2nd Edition, 
John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Publications 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Soman,S.A.,  Power System Protection,  NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, 
     https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/101/108101039/   
     
 
  
36 
 
 
Title Cyber-Physical Security in Smart Grid Number EE7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P 
[C] 
3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type ME 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide exposure to the various layers of smart grid architecture and security issues related 
to vital components of smart grid 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand various cyber layers of smart grid and the threats to the physical components, 
and design a secure system  
 
Contents  
Introduction: Physical components of a grid, communication in smart grid, self -
monitoring, self-healing, vulnerabilities of smart grid, cyber-physical security (5 lectures) 
 
Security Architecture of Smart Grids : Security architecture of smart Grid and its layers, 
typical SCADA network levels, conceptual control system with layering, robust and 
resilient control, secure network routing, management of information security, user 
patching  (6 lectures) 
 
Advanced Metering Infrastructure and Security Issues: Smart meters, customer gateway, 
AMI communication network, AMI head-end, AMI security threats, interactions, malicious 
code planted in the system, denial of service, insider attacks, unauthorized access (4 
lectures) 
 
SCADA System Security : Introduction to SCADA, Security Issues in SCADA, Public 
Information Availability, Platform Vulnerabilities, Network Configuration Vulnerabilities, 
Network Perimeter Vulnerabilities, DNP3 Threats (5 lectures) 
 
Plug-in Electric Vehicl e (PEV) Security Issues : Introduction to PEV Security, Privacy of 
movement, Secure payment, Critical Infrastructure and Physical Security, Communication 
issues in PEVs (4 lectures) 
 
Smart Grid Domain Security : IEEE standards for smart grid security, IEEE 8 02.11, IEEE 
802.15.4, IEEE 802.16, Bluetooth and BLE/BT5.0, ZigBee, Z-Wave, Gateway Component, 
FMEA, STAMP, HAZOP, Smart Grid Information Security (SGIS), SGIS Risk Impact Level 
(SGIS-RIL) (6 lectures) 
 
Blockchain for Smart Grid : Blockchain: Smart contract , applications of blockchain 
technology to energy; Energy trading:  Transition towards blockchain -based electricity 
trading market, Internet of Energy (IoE);   Distributed Energy Resources: Decentralized 
operation of interdependent power and energy networks based on Blockchain and security,  
Electric vehicles: Blockchain for decentralized optimization of energy sources: EV charging 
coordination via blockchain -based charging power quota trading,  Microgrid: microgrid 
monitoring and control using blockchain. (12 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Hossain,E., Han,Z., Poor,H.V., (2012), Smart Grid Communications and Networking , 
Cambridge University Press 
2. Berger,L.T., Iniewski,K., (2012), Smart Grid Applications, Communications, and Security, 
John Wiley and Sons Publications 
3. Shafie-khan,M., (2020), Blockchain-based Smart Grids, Academic Press  
Self Learning Material 
 
37 
 
 
Title Energy Harvesting Number PHL6XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type ME 
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide the student with an extended knowledge of the basic principles and recent 
advances in Energy harvesting technologies for low -power applications including 
self-powered or autonomous systems. 
2. Provide the students with the role of materials in energy harvesting technologies 
with a focus on miniaturized and microfabricated devices. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students will: 
1. Develop an understanding of basic principle, concept, working mechanism and 
applications of various energy harvesting devices. 
2. Develop an understanding to design new energy harvesting systems. 
  
Contents 
Micro Photovoltaic Module Energy Harvesting: p-n Junction and Crystalline Si Solar Cells, 
Amorphous Silicon Solar Cell, CIGS and CdTe Solar Cell Development, Polymer Solar Cell, 
Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells (DSSC), Perovskite Solar Cells, Monolithically Integration of 
Solar Cells with IC, Low -Power Micro Photovoltaic Systems, Maximum Power Point 
Tracking (Lectures : 14) 
 
Mechanical Energy Harvesting : Energy Harvesting from Macro to Micro to Nano, 
Piezoelectric MEMS Energy Harvesters, Nano -Piezoelectric Generator, Piezoelectric 
Cantilever Generator, Piezoelectric Transducers. New -generation Triboelectric 
Nanogenerators. (Lectures: 8) 
 
Thermal Energy Harvesting:  Overview of Nanoscale Heat Conduction and the Seebeck 
Effect, Thermoelectric energy harvesting and Power Generation, Thermoelectric figures 
of merit, Novel nanostructured Thermoelectric materials and devices, Thermal energy 
harvesting using pyroelectric materials, Thermodynamic cycles for Pyroelectric energy 
harvesting, Nanostructured and micro-scale materials and devices. (Lectures: 14) 
 
Textbook  
1. Briand, D., Yeatman, E., Roundy, S., Micro Energy Harvesting Wiley, 2015. 
2. Shashank, P., Inman, D. J., Energy Harvesting Technologies, Springer, 2009. 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Elvin, N., Erturk, A., Advances in Energy Harvesting Methods, Springer, 2013. 
2. Jaffe, R., and Taylor, W., Physics of Energy, MIT open course, 
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/physics/8-21-the-physics-of-energy-fall-2009/ 
3.  
Preparatory Course Material  
4. Pal, K., Selection of Nanomaterials for Energy harvesting and Energy Storage 
Applications, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112107283/ 
 
 
 
  
38 
 
 
Title Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion Process Number CH7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering  L-T-P [C] 1-0-0 
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type ME 
Prerequisite Thermodynamics   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide understanding of Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion (OTEC) cycles, hybrid 
OTEC systems.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the: 
1. Proper knowledge about Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion (OTEC) cycles and hybrid 
OTEC technologies. 
2. Ability to understand OTEC process design challenges. 
 
vi Contents  
Ocean as a Heat Engine:  Concepts of ocean thermal energy, Favourable temperature 
difference, OTEC history. (2 lectures) 
OTEC Cycles: Closed OTEC cycles, Open OTEC cycle, Flow diagrams, Comparison of OTEC 
Cycles, Products of OTEC: electricity, desalinated water, cold water for ai r-conditioning 
etc., Hybrid OTEC systems. (6 lectures)   
OTEC Process Design: System components, Heat exchangers, evaporators, Pumps, 
Turbines, Piping. (6 lectures) 
 
 
Textbook  
1. Takahashi, Patrick and Trenka, Andrew, (1996) Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion, Ist 
ed., Wiley. 
 
Reference Books  
1. Lockerby,R.W., (1981) Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion (OTEC), US Department of 
Energy, United States. 
 
  
39 
 
 
Title Optics for Solar Energy Applications  Number PHL6XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type ME 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
The students will gain 
1. Knowledge to understand the issues related to optics in solar thermal applications.  
2. Knowledge in designing and analyzing optics for imaging and non-imaging optics. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Show a basic familiarity with the Concentrated Solar Power (CSP) plants. 
2. To design as individual optical concentrators and Optical Field Design.  
 
Contents  
 Basics of Maxwell equation: Review of Electromagnetic theory  ( 2 Lectures) 
Wave Optics:  Polarization (Brewster Angle) and Fresnel Coefficients, Interference, 
Diffraction and Fermat Principle in Optics (5 Lectures) 
Ray Optics: Optical Momentum, The Eikonal  Equation , The Ray Equation, Point Spread 
Function (PSF), Optical Transfer Function (OTF)  (6  Lectures) 
Design of Two-Dimensional Concentrators: Thin lens formula, Concentrators for Sources at 
a Finite Distance and Tubular Receivers. (6  Lectures) 
Radiation and Detectors:  Black-body Radiation, Radiometry, Photometry, and Radiation 
Heat Transfer, Radiation detectors: Spectrometer, Power meter and Flux meter ( 7 
Lectures)  
Sun-earth geometry:  Derivation of incidence angles and tracking algorithms for the 
principal solar tracking modes and  Derivation of projected incidence angles for stationary 
concentrators ( 3 Lectures)  
Design of Nonimaging Optics:  Imaging Properties of the Design Method Nonimaging 
Applications, Conservation of Étendue, The Winston–Welford Design Method, Tailored Edge 
Ray Concentrators Designed for Maximum, Concentration , Tailored Edge, Ray 
Concentrators Designed for Lower Concentration , Fresnel Primaries and Applications of 
Nonimaging Concentrators. (7 Lectures) 
Applications to Solar E nergy Concentration high concentration : Design of Solar thermal 
fields, Design of Heliostat field, Parabolic Trough(PT),  Linear Fresnel Reflector (LFR)  and 
Design of Compound Parabolic Collectors (CPC), Ray Tracing Technique for Field Design ( 6 
Lectures) 
 
Textbook 
1. Welford W. T and Winston, R., High Collection Non-Imaging Optics, Academic Press 1989.  
2. Hecht, E., Optics, 4th  Ed., Pearson Education 2002. 
Reference book 
1. Born, M and Wolf, E., Principles of Optics, 7th Ed., Cambridge 1999. 
2. Pedrotti, F. L.,  Pedrotti, L.M  and Pedrotti, S. L., Introduction to Optics, 3 rd Ed., Pearson 
2008. 
3. Donald C. O’Shea: Elements of Modern Optical Design. John Wiley & Sons, 1985  
4.  Julio Chaves: Introduction to Nonimaging Optics. CRC Press, 2008. 
Self-Learning Material 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
  
 
  
40 
 
 
Title Theory of Vibrations Number MEL7XX0 
Department Civil Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D., Ph.D. Type ME 
Prerequisite Basic knowledge of mechanical 
vibrations 
  
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide the approach adopted for analyzing the structural dynamic characteristics and 
dynamic response of uniform and non-uniform structural elements, like beams.  
2. The approach is applicable for structural dynamic analysis of any structure.  
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Analyze the vibration characteristics of non-uniform beams.  
2.  Thorough understanding of approximate me thods used in the structural dynamic 
analysis. 
 
Contents  
Introduction: Discrete and continuous systems, SDOF, Types of Damping, Frequency 
response, Time response, Beating phenomenon, Response to impulse loading, Convolution 
integral, Numerical integration, Newmark-β method, Wilson-θ method [Lectures 9]. 
 
Rayleigh’s Method:  Approximate evaluation of natural frequency, improved Rayleigh’s 
method [Lectures 4]. 
Stiffness and flexibility influence coefficients, finite element stiffness of beam elements, Static 
condensation [Lectures 5]. 
Hamilton’s principle, Lagrange’s equations [Lectures 3]. 
 
Linear conservative natural systems:  Symmetric eigenvalue problem, Modal analysis, 
Systems with proportional damping, structural damping (complex stiffness) [Lectures 4]. 
 
Continuous parameter systems:  Longitudinal vibration of bars, bending vibration of 
beams, torsion vibration [Lectures 4]. 
 
Differential Eigenvalue Problem:  Admissible function, Comparison function, Eigen 
function [Lectures 2]. 
Positive definite system, self adjoint property [Lectures 2]. 
 
Natural modes of vibration: Mode shapes and natural frequencies [Lectures 2]. 
 
Approximate methods: Transfer Matrix method, Rayleigh’s quotient, Rayleigh-Ritz method, 
Galerkin method [Lectures 5]. 
 
Response to excitation: Mode summation, Mode acceleration [Lectures 2]. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Meirovitch, L., Principles and Techniques of Vibrations, 3rd Edition, Prentice Hall 
2. Meirovitch, L., Analytical Methods in Vibration Analysis, Macmillan 
3. Clough, R.W., and Penzien, J., Dynamics of Structures, McGraw Hill 
 
Online course Material 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105101006/ 
 
 
 
  
41 
 
 
Title Offshore Geo-technology Number CIE7XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech., M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type ME 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
1. To familiarize students with the dynamics of offshore environment. 
2. To introduce methods of soil and site investigation. 
3. To introduce designs, types, and analyses of piled foundation, shallow foundation, and 
anchoring systems. 
4. To introduce specific consideration of soil structure interaction of on-bottom and pipelines 
and risers. 
5. To provide overview of geo-hazards. 
 
Learning outcomes: 
1. Detailed knowledge of geophysical, geotechnical investigation, laboratory test and use 
of centrifuge modelling. 
2. Understanding of soil response under static and dynamic loads. 
3. Knowledge of the analysis and design of shallow foundation, piled foundation, anchoring 
system and on-bottom pipelines and risers. 
4. Understanding of marine slope failure and slides. 
 
Contents: 
Offshore environment:  Marine geology, Plate tectonics, Continental self, Marine -
sediments, Geotechnical characteristics, Ocean wind and waves, currents, wave theories, 
hydrodynamic forces (Lectures 7). 
Offshore site and soil investigation: Geophysical and Geotechn ical investigations; Soil 
classifications and tests- undrained tri-axial compression test, undrained strength; cyclic 
loading test, failure under cyclic loading, Centrifuge modelling [Lectures 7].  
Offshore foundations: Shallow and deep foundations and the ir applications, Design of 
offshore foundations as per API and DNV codes, Pile drivability and dynamic monitoring, 
Capacity of driven piles, Installation piled and shallow foundations in fine grained and 
permeable sediments, Stability of shallow foundation s, Dynamic analysis of vertical and 
inclined pile foundations, Impedance function of piles and frequency domain analysis 
[lectures 10]. 
Anchoring systems: Buoyant platforms and mooring systems, Mooring line analysis and 
forces on anchors, Types of anchors and their design;  API and DNV code provisions for 
anchor design, Dynamic effects on anchor and uplift of anchors, Dynamically penetrating 
anchors [Lectures 7]. 
Pipeline and riser geotechnics: Geotechnical inputs to pipeline design; Design issues and 
code provisions; Soil structure interaction for on -bottom pipelines and risers, Secondary 
stabilization [Lecture 6]  
Offshore geo-hazard: Types of marine geo-hazard and their identification, Submarine 
slope failures and slides, probabilistic hazard analysis [Lectures 5]. 
 
Text Books: 
1. Mark Randolph, Susan Gourvenec (2011). Offshore Geotechnical Engineering. Spon 
Press (Taylor & Francis), ISBN13: 978-0-415-47744-4(hbk). 
2. Paolo Boccotti (2000). Wave Mechanics for Ocean Engineering (1 st Ed), Elsevier 
Science. ISBN:  9780080543727 (eBook) 
 
 
  
42 
 
 
Title Rock Mechanics and Rock 
Engineering 
Number CIE7XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech, M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type ME 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
1. To understand fundamentals of stress -train behavior of isotropic and anisotropic 
rocks under different conditions 
2. To understand limits of rock strength and analysis of rock failure conditions  
3. To understand the influence anisotropy under at different scales 
4. Introduction of use of rock mechanics in tunneling, mining engineering, and reservoir 
geomechanics 
Learning outcomes 
1. Knowledge of geological and engineering classification of rocks. 
2. Detailed knowledge of failure criteria and influence of ambient conditions 
3. Knowledge of laboratory- and field-based stress measurement techniques 
4. Understanding of isotropic and anisotropic rock deformation 
5. Knowledge of tunneling in isotropic and anisotropic rocks 
6. Knowledge of natural and artificial support system in underground excavations 
7. Knowledge of wellbore stability and hydraulic fracturing 
Contents 
Classification and index properties of rocks: Geological classification of rocks; Index 
properties of rocks; Porosity; Density; Hydraulic conductivity and permeability; Strength; 
Slaking and durability; Sonic velocity; Classification of rock masses [Lectures 4]. 
 
Rock strength and failure criteria: Modes of failure; Laboratory strength tests; Stress -
strain behaviors in compression; Application of complete stress -strain curve; The Mohr -
Coulomb failure criterion; Hoek-Brown failure criterion; Effect of size, water, and anisotropy 
on strength [Lectures 6]. 
 
Initial stresses in rocks and their measurement: Estimating the initial stresses; 
Techniques for measurement of in-situ stresses; Determination of SHmin from leak-off tests; 
Wellbore failure and the magnitude of SHmax; Drilling-induced tensile fracture and magnitude 
of SHmax; Estimation of rock strength from breakouts [Lectures 5]. 
 
Planes of weakness in rocks: Joint orientation; Joint roughness; Relationship between 
displacement and strength; Effect of water pressure [Lectures 5]. 
 
Deformability of rocks: Elastic and non -elastic behavior; Measurement of deformability 
properties by static tests; Measurement of deformability properties by dynamic 
measurement; Fractured rock; Influence of time on rock deformation [Lectures 6]. 
 
Rock mechanics for tunneling: Opening in competent rocks; Horizontally layered rocks; 
Rock with inclined layers; Plastic behavior around tunnels; Time dependent behavior of 
tunnels [Lectures 5]. 
 
Rock mechanics for mining engineering: Natural support: Pillar design approach, Pillar 
strength equation, Model of pillar failure, Pillar stabilization; Artificial support: Rock support 
interaction analysis, Classification, Primary reinforcement, Secondary support system; Rock 
blasting process, control, and optimization [Lectures 5]. 
 
Rock mechanics for hydrocarbon reservoir: Tectonic stress field; Pore pressure 
measurement; Mechanical properties and stress data from laboratory analysis and field 
data; Concepts of critically stressed crust; Basics of hydraulic fracturing; Wellbore stability 
[Lectures 6]. 
 
Text Books 
43 
 
1. Richard E. Goodman (1989) Introduction to Rock Mechanics (2 nd Ed). Wiley. ISBN-
10: 0471812005. 
2. Mark D. Zoback. (2007) Reservoir Geomechncs. Cambridge University Press. ISBN -
978-0-521-77069-9. 
3. Debasis Deb, Abhiram Kumar Verma (2016) Fundamentals and Applications of Rock 
Mechanics. PHI Learning Pvt. Ltd. ISBN-978-81-203-5182-0. 
 
Online course Material 
1. V. B. Maji. Rock Mechanics – Web course. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105106055/ 
 
  
44 
 
 
Title Stability of slopes Number CIE7XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech, M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type ME 
Prerequisite    
Objectives: 
1. To understand the influence of geology, rockmass properties, and hydrology on the 
stability of slopes.  
2. To present basic types of analytical and numerical methods of slope stability analysis. 
3. To introduce methods and instruments of slope monitoring and stabilization. 
4. To enable planning and design of preventive measures, and redesign of failed slopes. 
 
Learning outcomes: 
1. Knowledge of data collection from field -work, aerial photography, geophysics, and 
geological map. 
2. Knowledge of kinematic analysis of slopes using geological data and stereographic 
projection. 
3. Knowledge of kinetic analysis of slopes and influence of critical geometrical and 
hydrological parameters. 
4. Knowledge of available methods of slope stabilizat ion by reinforcements and rock 
removal. 
5. Knowledge of instrumental facilities to monitor slope movement and subsequent 
classification. 
 
Course content: 
Structural geology for slope analysis: Geological structures; Orientation of 
discontinuities; Introduction to geological maps; Identification of modes of slope instability 
[Lecture: 4] 
Site investigation and geological data collection: Site reconnaissance; Geological 
mapping; Spacing, persistence, and roughness of discontinuities; Probabilistic analysis of 
structural geology; Drilling and logging. [Lecture: 4] 
Rock strength properties: Scale effect and rock strength; Shear strength of discontinuities; 
Laboratory testing of discontinuities; Hoek-Brown strength criterion for fractured rock mass; 
Rock durability and compressive strength [Lecture: 4] 
Plane failure:  Conditions of plane failure; Influence of groundwater on stability; Critical 
tension crack: identification and influence; Influence of critical slide plane inclination; Analysis 
of failure on a rough plane; Reinforcement of a slope; Seismic analysis of slopes [Lecture: 5] 
Wedge failure: Conditions of wedge failure; Wedge analysis including cohesion, friction, and 
water pressure; Wedge stability chart for friction; Compression wedge analysis [ Lecture: 5] 
Circular failure: Conditions of circular failure; Methods of analysis; Derivation and use of 
circular failure charts; Location of critical slide surface and tension crack; Bishop’s and Janbu’s 
method of failure analysis. [Lecture: 6] 
Toppling failure: Types of toppling failure; Kinematic analysis of block toppling failure; Limit 
equilibrium analysis of toppling [Lecture: 5] 
Stabilization of slopes:  Stablization programs: Rock slope Inventory, Hazard rating 
analysis; Stabilization by rock reinforcements; St abilization by rock removal; Measures 
against rock fall [Lecture: 5] 
Movement monitoring:  Types of slope movement: Initial response, Regressive and 
progressive movements, Long-term creep; Surface monitoring methods; Data interpretation 
[Lecture: 4] 
 
Suggested Textbooks: 
1. Duncan C Wyllie, Christopher W. Mah (2005) Rock Slope Engineering , 4th Ed, Spon 
Press (Taylor & Francis Group), ISBN 0–415–28001–X (pbk). 
2. Robin Chowdhury, Phil Flentje, Gautam Bhattacharya (2010) Geotechnical Slope 
Analysis. CRC Press (Taylor & Francis Group), ISBN: 978-0-415-46974-6 (Hbk). 
 
 
 
 
45 
 
 
Title Wind and Earthquake Engineering Number CIE7XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech, M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D., Ph.D. Type ME 
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
1. To acquaint the students with the fundamental knowledge of wind and earthquake 
engineering to pursue higher level courses/research on the wind and earthquake 
engineering 
2. To provide the requisite information on the above two subjects to the students to work 
in design offices.  
3. To impart the back ground materials for pursuing some courses offered in the fields of 
specialization (cores). 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Enable the students to apply the knowledge gained in solving practical problems. 
2. Enable the students to analyze the collected wind and earthquake data for providing 
systematic inputs to be used in practice. 
3. To make the students capable of using the knowledge gained for wind a nd earthquake 
hazard mapping. 
Contents 
Atmospheric wind circulation, its mechanism, types of wind, wind measurements, wind 
characteristic, different ways to express wind energy, inputs required for the analysis of 
structures, aero dynamic and aero-elastic effects, aero elastic instabilities-flutter, galloping, 
torsional divergence, dynamics in the wind codes [lectures 20].  
Inside of the earth and tectonic plate movement, major tectonic plates, fault lines, tectonic 
theory of the occurrence of the earthquak e, earthquake hazards, earthquake input for 
structural analysis, concept of the response spectrum, deterministic seismic analysis of 
structures, salient features of earthquake code [lectures 20]. 
 
Text Books 
1. Ghosh S K and Fanella  D A, Seismic and Wind Design of Concrete Buildings, 
International Code Council-New York (2004). 
2. Taranath B S, Wind and Earthquake Resistant Buildings: Structural Analysis and 
Design, Marcel Dekker, New York (2004). 
 
Others: 
1. Datta T K, Seismic Analysis of Structures, John Wiley & Sons, New York (2010). 
2. IS 1893 -Part-I, Criteria for Earthquake Resistant Design of Structures: General 
Provisions and Buildings, Bureau of Indian Standards, New Delhi (2016). 
 
 
  
46 
 
 
Title Process safety and Hazards Number CH7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type ME 
Prerequisite None   
Objective 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide comprehensive knowledge of safety regulations and their practices, 
chemical plant hazards and their control, risk assessment and management 
principles and techniques and accident analysis. 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Identify and distinguish typical sources of risk and hazard in a process plant, 
undertake hazard and operability (HAZOP) study.  
 
Contents  
Safety in Industries: Concepts and definition, storage of dangerous materials, Plant 
layout Safety systems, Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) incidence 
rate, Fatal accident rate (FAR), Measures to take during accidents, Toxicology (10 
lectures)  
Industrial Hygiene: Government regulations, Industrial hygiene and safety aspects 
related to toxicity, nois e, pressure, temperature, vibrations, radiation etc, Evaluation 
Methods, Evaluating workers Exposures to dusts, noise. (8 lectures) 
Selection Mechanism : Technology and process selection, Scale of disaster, Fire 
triangle Ignition, Confined and unconfined ex plosion, Vapors cloud explosions, Boiling 
liquid expanding vapor explosion (BLEVE), Dust explosion, shock wave, Flammability 
characteristics of liquids and vapors, Minimum oxygen concentration (MOC) and 
Inerting. (8 lectures) 
Handling Chemicals and toxicity:  Control of toxic chemicals, Storage and handling 
of flammable and toxic chemical, Runway reactions, Relief system risk and hazards 
management, Design to prevent Fires and Explosions, Miscellaneous Design for 
preventing Fires and Explosion. (8 lectures) 
Hazards Identification: checklists, Surveys, Hazard and Operability Studies (HAZOP), 
Safety reviews. Risk Assessment, Hazard models and risk data. Tackling disasters, plan 
for emergency. Risk management routines, Emergency shutdown systems, Role of 
computers in safety, Prevention of hazard human element, Technology and process 
selection. (8 lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. Daniel A. Crowl and Joseph F. Louvar, 1990, Chemical Process Safety: 
Fundamentals with applications, Prentice Hall, Inc.  
2. Lee, F.P., 1983, Loss prevention in the process Industries, Volume 1 and 2 
Butterworth. 
3. Hoboken, N. J., 2000, Guidelines for Chemical Process Quantitative Risk Analysis, 
Wiley-Interscience.  
Reference Books 
1. R. W. King and J. Magid, Industrial Hazards and Safety Handbook, Butterworth, 
1982.  
2. G. L. Wells, Safety in Process Plant Design, John Wiley and Sons Inc., 1980.  
3. Fawcett, H.H. and W.S. Wood, Safety and Accident Prevention in Chemical 
Operations, 2nd Edition, Wiley-Interscience, New York, 1982.  
 
  
47 
 
 
Title Advanced Energy Systems Number CH7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type ME 
Prerequisite None   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide comprehensive knowledge about conventional and several advanced energy 
production technology. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have: 
1. Good knowledge about different energy production systems. 
 
Contents  
● Introduction: Latest topics on energy, Energy fuels for power generation, 
conventional power generation technology. [6 lectures] 
● Emerging clean energy systems: Integrated Gasification combined cycle (IGCC), 
Pressurized fluidised bed combustion (PFBC, AFBC). [6 lectures] 
● Heavy fuel based power generation. [3 lectures] 
● Advanced combustion systems. [4 lectures]  
● Understanding Natural gas cycles. [4 lectures] 
● Energy conservation in power plants. [4 lectures] 
● Geological CO2 sequestering. [3 lectures] 
● Natural gas cycles. [4 lectures] 
● Materials-based Solutions to advanced Ene rgy systems: role of advanced material, 
general devices and process approaches, key materials for advanced energy 
systems, structural material. [8 lectures] 
 
 
Textbook  
1. Khartekenko, N., Khartekenko, V.,  2010, Advanced Energy Systems , Taylor & 
Francies, Second Edition. 
 
Reference Books  
1. Colin Tong, 2019, Introduction to Materials for Advanced Energy Systems, Springer. 
2. I. Dincer and C. Zamfirescu, 2011, Sustainable Energy Systems and Applications , 
Springer. 
 
 
  
48 
 
 
Title Microfluidic Fuel Cells Number CH7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 1-0-0 
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type ME 
Prerequisite None   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide in-depth knowledge about the fundamentals of microfluidics devices as fuel 
cells. 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have: 
1. Detailed understanding of Microfluidic fuel cell. 
 
Contents  
Microfluidic cells:  Introduction, concept, classification, and challenges, categories, 
Thermodynamic and kinetic of microfluidic fuel cells, electrochemical principles and 
transport. [7 lectures] 
Designs: Microfabrication techniques, 2D, 3D electrodes in microfluidic fuel ce lls, 
performance evolution. [3 lectures]  
Microfluidics devises: co-laminar streaming, fuel cells with biocatalysts, gas diffusion 
electrodes, microfluidics redox batteries, cell arrays and Stacks. [4 lectures] 
 
 
Textbook  
1. Erik Kjeang, 2014, Microfluidic Fuel Cells and Batteries, Springer. 
 
Reference Books  
 Research Articles from different journals.  
 
  
49 
 
 
Title Air Pollution and Control Number CIE7XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech, M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type ME 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
1. To gain understanding of basic concept of air pollution, its sources and effects on human 
health and climate. 
2. To introduce concepts of aerosol dynamics used in ambient sampling, designing 
measurement technologies and air quality modeling.  
3. To develop understanding of the concepts and strategies for control of particulate matter 
and gas-phase pollutants.  
4. To provide knowledge of current state of the atmosphere and introduce fundamentals of 
pollutant transport and dispersion, and modeling. 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to achieve proficiency in: 
1. Developing a broad overview of local -to-global scale pollution issues and their specific 
impact on human health and environment. 
2. Solving problems related to dispersion and air quality modeling 
3. Understanding the source level air pollution issues and identify the right control 
techniques/measures to meet the desired standard levels.  
4. Computing the performance of various unit operations and processes used in the air 
treatment.   
Contents 
Introduction to air pollution: Historical events [Meuse River Valley 1930, Donora 
Pennsylvania 1948, London Smog 1952, Bhopal Gas Tragedy 1984, and related  Concepts], 
Scales of air pollution, Sources and classification [CAPs and HAPs] of air pollutants, Air quality 
and standards, Emission Inventory, The Earth’s atmosphere: Structure and Composition, and 
energy balance [Lectures 6]. 
Aerosol Physics: Fundamentals: Source, Size and Size distribution, Gas and Particle motion: 
Brownian motion, Diffusion, Inertia, External force field, Aerosol dynamics: coagulation, 
condensation, nucleation, particle measurements and Sampling techniques [Lectures 10]. 
Emissions Control devices:  Removal of particles from gas stream: Settling chambers, 
Cyclone separators, electrostatic precipitation, filtration, wet collectors, collection efficiency; 
Removal of gases from effluents stream: Absorpti on by liquids, adsorption on solids, 
Examples: SO2 and NOx removal [Lectures 8]. 
Meteorology: Atmospheric meteorology, Wind velocity profile and Wind rose, turbulence, 
inversion layer and mixing depth and Atmospheric Stability [Lectures 6]. 
Dispersion of air pollutants and Air Quality modeling:  Dispersion models, Gaussian 
dispersion model: assumptions, dispersion parameters and effective stack height, plume rise 
and plume behavior, Receptor models [Lectures 6]. 
Effects of Air Pollution on Cl imate and Human health: Tropospheric Ozone chemistry, 
Photochemical Smog, Acid Rain, Visibility, Indoor Air Pollution, Dose Response and Health 
effects [Lectures 6].  
 
Text Books 
1. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics- From Air Pollution to Climate Change, J. H. Seinfeld 
and S. N. Pandis, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., Third Edition, 2013. 
2. Aerosol Technology-Properties, Behavior and Measurement of Airborne Particles, W. C. 
Hinds, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., Second Edition, 1998. 
3. Introduction to Air Pollution Science, R. F. Phalen and R. N. Phalen, Jones & Bartlett 
Learning, LLC, Burlington, MA, 2013. 
4. Aerosol Measurement: Principles, Techniques and Applications, edited by K. Willeke, P. 
Baron, Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1993. 
Online course Material 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105104099/ 
 
50 
 
 
Title Solid Waste Management Number MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type ME 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
1. To enable understanding of life cycle of waste generation to disposal or sustainable re -
use 
2. To inculcate basic steps of solid waste management  
3. To enable selection of best possible location specific solid waste management options  
 
Learning outcomes 
1. Conceptually design waste conversion/treatment processes 
2. Able to assess the environmental and the economic impact of specific types of solid waste 
generated and its reuse  
3. Enabled to develop innovative and smarter solutions of solid waste management at rural 
and urban environs 
 
Contents 
Solid waste type and Classification, Quantity, Types of Waste Stream and its life cycle 
Waste Generation - Industrial, Municipal and Agriculture, 4R strategies and Social costs 
[Lectures 4]. 
Collection and Transport: Collection Components, their Reliability, Scavengers, Automated 
Waste Collection, Design for Larger Transfer Operations, Automated Control, Inventory and 
Monitoring [Lectures 5]. 
Separation and Processing Techniques: Separation and Screening Equipment, 
Automated Sorters, Solid Waste Processing, Recovering, E -Waste, Size Reduction, 
Incineration and pyrolysis [Lectures 6]. 
Options for Disposal , Selection Criteria, Sanitary Landfill, Properties of Gases from 
Landfills, Hazards and Air Pollution, , Leachate Control and Management [Lectures 5]. 
Composting: Benefits of Composting, Biological Processes Involved in Composting Chemical 
Processes, Physical Processes, Thermodynamics of Compositing, Gasifying, Refuse -derived 
fuel [Lectures 8]. 
Microbiology: Biological decomposition, Microbiology of composting, Municipal solid waste 
Pathogens, enteric microbes in landfills and leachate, Pure culture, Mixed culture screening 
tests [Lectures 6]. 
Reuse and Recycle : Reuse, Increased Prod uct Lifetime, Material Life Cycle Studies, 
Recycling, New Materials-Self Destructing/Organic, MSW Handling Rules, Public Aptitude, and 
Legislation [Lectures 6]. 
 
Text Books 
1. George Tchobanoglous, Hilary Theisen, Samuel Vigil, Integrated Solid Waste 
Management: Engineering Principles and Management Issues, McGraw -Hill Series in 
Water Resources and Environmental Engineering, ISBN -10: 0070632375, ISBN -13: 
978-0070632370 
2. Kanti L. Shah, Basics of Solid and Hazardous Waste Management Technology, Prentice 
Hall, ISBN-10: 0139603786, ISBN-13: 978-0139603785 
3. Ni-Bin Chang, Ana Pires, Sustainable Solid Waste Management: A Systems 
Engineering Approach, Wiley -IEEE Press; 1 edition (March 16, 2015), ISBN -10: 
1118456912, ISBN-13: 978-1118456910  
 
References Books 
1. Edward A. McBean, Frank A. Rovers, Grahame J. Farquhar, Solid Waste Landfill 
Engineering and Design, Prentice Hall; ISBN -10: 0130791873, ISBN -13: 978 -
0130791870 
2. Christian Ludwig,  Stefanie Hellweg,  Municipal Solid Waste Management  , Springer 
2003, London, ISBN 978-3-642-62898-6.  
3. Roger Tim Haug, Composting Engineering: Principles and Practice, Ann Arbor Science, 
MI, ISBN-0-250-40347-1 
 
51 
 
Online Resources 
T V Ramachandra Municipal Soild Waste Management, IISc Bangalore 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/120108005/ 
Solid and Hazardous Waste Management,IITM, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105106056/ 
 
 
  
52 
 
 
Title Remote Sensing and GIS for 
Environment Management 
Number MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-2 [4] 
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type ME 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
 
1. To introduce you to the basic principles of observing the Earth’s geography and concepts 
of remote sensing  
2. To explore its applications specific to the environment and natural resource management. 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Identify and obtain appropriate satellite imagery for a land surface based resource 
management, service infrastructure and real world application  
2. Demonstrate proficiency in the common ( open source: QGIS/ Google Earth Engine, 
ERDAS Imagine, ENVI) and advanced (ARCGIS, Ecognition, QT modeler) remote sensing 
software packages  
3. Conduct basic to intermediate remote sensing analyses (atmospheric and geographic 
corrections, spectral transformations and enhancements, classification, modelling and 
change detection)  
 
Contents 
 
In-situ field observation ; data collection; Photographic and Remote Sensing data 
collection, Spectral spatial and temporal aspects, analog and digital processing introduction 
and sensing economics [Lectures 4] 
Electromagnetics: conduction, convection and radiation; radiation and its models, 
[Lectures 6].  
Aerial Photography - Camera, photography filtration -films, planning field missions 
[Lectures 4] 
Photogrammetry : Aerial photography, stereoscopy and its principles, image digitization, 
aero-triangulation, extracting spot elevation, contours and DEMs using soft copy 
photography, Ortho-imagery and Area Measurement [Lectures 6] 
Multispectral Imagery: discrete detectors and scanning mirrors, Landsat: multi -spectral 
scanner,  thematic mapper, Enha nced Thematic Mapper plus (Landsat 7), , GOES -,AVHRR 
Radiometer, Aircraft Multispectral Scanners [Lectures 8] 
Thermal Infrared Remote Sensing: Thermal infrared radiation properties, laws (Stefan -
bolzmann, Wein’s, Kirchoff’s)[ Lectures 2]  
Microwave Remote Sensing: RADAR, SAR remote sensing, Radar interferometry, LIDAR 
Passive Microwave Remote Sensing- Radiometers. [Lectures 3] 
Visual image Interpretation : The aerial/regional perspective, 3D depth perspective 
[Lectures 5] 
Digital Image Interpretation and Analysis: Preprocessing of Images, Image 
Enhancement, Contrast and basics of spatial feature manipulation. [Lectures 5] 
 
Note: Labs will have hands -on use of the latest Google Earth Engine (GEE), QGIS, ERDAS 
IMAGINE, and ArcGIS software. It will also look into application of remote sensing imagery 
in soil and water analysis, overlaying data retrieved from different subject areas of 
engineering, lidar imagery and other GIS data. 
List of Experiments on Surveying Based Laboratory:  
1. To assess the distance between two inaccessible points in a specific area using a 
compass as well as plotting the area using closed traverse (prismatic compass).  
2. To solve two-point, and three-point problems using plane table survey.  
3. To understand differe ntial levelling, vertical/cross sectional plotting and contouring 
using automatic levellers. 
4. To survey a nearby plot bounded by any polygon using a theodolite and also to 
perform trigonometric levelling to find the characteristics of a nearby building.  
53 
 
5. To plot a known area using GPS measurements and assess the accuracy of the 
measurement 
6. Using total station to combine electromagnetic distance measurement and electronic 
theodolite to understand the ramp in the institute and their geometrical features with 
high accuracy.  
List of Experiments in GIS Laboratory: 
1. To create a map of any area using vector data models using available ground data. 
2. To perform geo-referencing when coordinate values are not given.  
3. To study terrain data such as slope, aspect, and hill shade. How to use these for 
representation of different social/service as well as frequency of different aspects 
concerning demographic data.  
4. To create a stream network or perform stream order generati on or delineate 
watersheds created by a water body using DEM files.  
5. To perform site suitability analysis for a service building (example hospital) near to 
a agricultural and inhabited land near an arid village at the edge of an oasis near 
Jodhpur.  
6. Basic experiments on image sharpening and image resolution using ARC GIS/ ERDAS 
IMAGINE processing tool. 
Text Books 
1. John R. Jenkins, Remote Sensing of the Environment: An Earth Prespective 
2. Lillesand, T.M., Kiefer, R.W. & Chipman , J.W. 2008. Remote Sensing and Image 
Interpretation, 6th Edition, John Wiley and Sons.  
Reference Books 
1. Floyd F. Sabins, Remote Sensing: Principles and Applications (3rd edition), Publisher : 
Waveland Press, Edition : 3 rd, Print ISBN : 9781577665076, 1577665074, eText ISBN : 
9781478618171.0 
2. Gopi, S., Sathikumar, R., and Madhu, N., Advanced Surveying: Total Station, GIS and 
Remote Sensing, Pearson, 2007, Dorling Kindersley (India).ISBN 978-81-3017-0067-9. 
3. Barrett, E.C. & Cu rtis, L.F. 2007. Introduction to Environmental Remote Sensing, 
Routledge Publisher. 
 
 
 
  
54 
 
 
Title Climate Change and Impact Number CIE7XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech, M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type ME 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
1. To gain understanding of scientific foundation and key concepts of atmospheric 
science, climate data collection and impacts of GHGs. 
2. To develop scientific basis of our understanding of climate system and climate change, 
and associated uncertainties. 
3. To provide knowledge on the impacts of climate change on natural world in the current 
scenario and coming centuries. 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to achieve proficiency in: 
1. Understanding present climate system in the context of Earth’s history, reconstructing 
climate evolution and relevant scientific uncertainties.  
2. Developing basics of climate change science with key concepts of climate, weather, 
energy balance and GHG effect. 
3. Understanding energy flows within Earth-Atmosphere system.  
4. Explaining the large -scale atmospheric circulations with underlying fluid mechanics 
principles and role of oceans in climate variability. 
5. Developing scientific understanding of climate forcing, sensitivity and feedback systems.  
6. Understanding the basics of energy balance models and fundamental equations of Global 
Circulation Models for simulating and estimating past and future climate systems.  
7. Understanding the potential impacts of climate chang e and future climate change 
projections. 
 
Contents 
Introduction to Climate and Climate Change: Evolution of Earth’s climate: history, 
Instrumental and paleoclimatic record, Climate Change:  Definition, Components of climate 
system, Global energy balance, GHGs and Greenhouse effect [Lectures 5]. 
Radiative Energy Transfer: Radiation laws,  Radiation Processes, Absorption and 
Scattering by Gases and Particles, Solar Zenith Angle and Aerosol Optical Depth, Radiative 
Transfer Equation [Lectures 5]. 
Convection and Atmospheric Circulation:  Dry and moist convection,  Atmospheric 
convection and types, Scales of motion, Energy and Momentum Transport [Lectures 7]. 
Oceanic Circulation: Physical characteristics of ocean, Energy transport mechanism: Wind 
driven circulation theories, and thermohaline circulation [Lectures 4]. 
Climate sensitivity and feedback mechanisms: Equilibrium Climate sensitivity,  
Transient Climate Response, Feedback: Concept, Fast and slow feedback 
mechanisms/Processes, Climate sensitivity estimates [Lectures 5]. 
Climate Variability:  Buffering atmospheric temperature changes, Atmosphere -ocean 
coupling: El Nino and Southern Oscillations [Lectures 3]. 
Climate modeling: One layer energy balance model, 1D EBM, Global Circulation Model, 
difference between Weather forecast models and GCMs [Lectures 8]. 
Climate Change Impacts and future projections: Sea level rise, Ecosystem and 
biodiversity, Shifting water resources, Agricul tural impacts, severe weather impacts and 
Human health; Impact assessment of GHGs on global temperature, rainfall and drought 
patterns, atmospheric circulation. [Lectures 5]. 
Text Books 
1. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics- From Air Pollution to Climate Change, J. H. Seinfeld 
and S. N. Pandis, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., Third Edition, 2013. 
2. Fundamentals of Atmospheric modeling, Marck Jacobson, Cambridge University Press, 
Second Edition, 2005. 
3. Air Pollution and Global Warming: History, Science and Solutions, Ma rk Jacobson, 
Cambridge University Press, Second Edition, 2012. 
4. Atmosphere, Ocean, and Climate Dynamics, John Marshall ad R. Alan Plumb, Elsevier 
Academic Press, 2008. 
Online course Material 
55 
 
 https://courses.edx.org/courses/course-v1:SDGAcademyX+CCSI001+3T2019/course/ 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/119106008/ 
 
 
  
56 
 
 
Title Green building and Sustainable Materials Number CIE7XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech, M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type ME 
Prerequisite    
Objectives: Objectives of this course are:  
1. To introduce elements of green building construction and use of sustainable 
materials. 
2. To familiarize students with different national and international green performance 
ratings. 
3. To teach students methods of carbon footprint reduction and increase in energy 
efficiency of a building. 
Learning Outcomes: A graduate of this course will have a thorough idea of: 
1. National and international green building assessment system and requirements.  
2. Green building design elements and use of sustainable materials. 
3. Techniques to reduce the carbon footprint of a green building. 
4. Management of hydrological cycle, treatment of waste, and maintainance of indoor 
air quality. 
5. Green building economics, business plan, and management.  
 
Contents 
Introduction to green building: Rationale for high -performance green building; green 
building progress and obstacles; trends in high -performance green building; the green 
building movement. (Lectures: 3) 
Ecological design: design vs ecological design; contemporary ecological design; future 
ecological design; thermodynamics: limits on recycling and the dissipation of materials 
(Lectures: 3) 
Green building assessment: US green building assessment system; international green 
building assessment system; performance assessment. (Lectures: 3) 
LEED building rating system:  history of LEED; structure of the LEED suite of building 
assessment systems; LEED credentials; the LEED process; LEED categories. (Lectures: 
3) 
The Green Globes building assessment system: the Green Globes process; Green Globes 
verification and certification; structure of the ANSI/GBI 01 -2010 standard; the Green 
Globes professional and Green Globes Assessor. (Lectures: 3) 
Green building design process:  conventional vs green building delivery systems; 
executing the green building project; the integrated design progress; role of Charrette 
in the design process; green building documentation requirements. (Lectures: 3) 
Sustainable site and landscape:  land and landscape approaches for green buildings; 
sustainable landscapes; enhancing ecosystems; stormwater management; low -impact 
development; heat island mitigation; light trespass and pollution reduction; sustainable 
site initiative. (Lectures: 3) 
Energy and carbon footpr int reduction: building energy issues; high -performance 
building energy design strategy; passive design strategy; building envelope; internal 
load reduction; active mechanical system; water -heating system; electrical power 
systems; innovative energy optimi zation strategies; renewable energy systems; fuel 
cells; smart buildings and energy management systems; ozone -depleting chemicals in 
HVAC&R systems; reducing carbon footprint of the built environment. (Lectures: 4) 
Built environment hydrological cycle: global water resource depletion; hydrological cycle 
terminology; high-performance building hydrological cycle strategy; designing the high-
performance building hydrological cycle; water budget rules of thumb; sustainable 
stormwater management; landscaping water efficiency. (Lectures: 4) 
Closing materials loops:  distinguishing between green building products and green 
building materials; LCA of building materials and products; environmental product 
declaration; materials and product certification systems; emerg ing construction 
materials and products; design for deconstruction. (Lectures: 4) 
Indoor environmental quality:  IEQ issues; design; main components of integrated IEQ 
design; emission from building materials; economic benefits of good indoor 
environmental quality. (Lectures: 3) 
57 
 
Construction operations and commissioning:  site protection planning; indoor air quality 
during construction; construction materials management; construction and demolition 
waste management. (Lectures: 3) 
Green building economics: the business case for high -performance green building; the 
economics of green building; quantifying green building benefits. (Lectures: 3)  
 
Text Books 
 
1. Charles J. Kibert (2013). Sustainable Construction. John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-1-
118-33013-5 
2. J. Newman and Ban Sang Choo (2003) Advanced Concrete Technology -Constituent 
Materials (1st Ed), Elsevier. ISBN 9780080489988. 
3. S. Kubba (2010) LEED Practices, Certification, and Accreditation Hand book (1st Ed) 
Elsevier. ISBN 9780080958590. 
 
Additional materials: 
 
1. Ministry of Power, Energy Conservation Building Code 2018, Revised Version, Bureau 
of Energy Efficiency, 2018, 
2. Indian Building Congress, Practical Handbook on Energy Conservation in Buildings, 1 
st ed. Nabhi Publication, 2008. 
3. TERI-Griha’s Green Design practices (www.teriin.org/bcsd/griha/griha.htm) 
4. Sartori, I., and Hestnes, A. G. “Energy use in the life cycle of conventional and low -
energy buildings: A review article”, Energy and Buildings., 20, 249-257.2007 
5. Green Building Basics, California Integrated Waste Management Board 
(www.ciwmb.ca.gov/GREENBUILDING/Basics.htm#What) 
6. Catarina Thormark. “A low energy building in a life cycle —its embodied energy, 
energy need for operation and recycling potential”, Building and Environment., 37, 
429-435.2001. 
 
Online course Material 
“NOC:Energy Efficiency, Acoustics and daylighting in Building” by Prof. B. Bhattacharjee on 
NTPEL. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/102/105102175/ 
 
  
58 
 
 
Title Traffic Flow Theory Number CIE7XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech, M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type ME 
Prerequisite    
Objectives: The course will introduce students to: 
1. Fundamentals of traffic flow 
2. Analysis of traffic flow 
3. Traffic flow modelling approaches 
 
Learning Outcomes: At the end of the course, the student should be able to: 
1. Differentiate and analyse traffic flow parameters at micro-macro levels 
2. Analyse congestion propagation in traffic flow 
3. Understand the state-of-the-art traffic flow modelling 
4. Perform traffic flow modelling and analysis using field data   
 
Contents 
Introduction to Traffic Flow theory [No. of lectures – 6]: Macroscopic parameters – Space 
mean speed, Density, and Flow; Microscopic parameters – Time mean speed, Time 
headway, Space headway, occupancy; Relation between microscopic and macroscopic 
parameters; Fundamental traffic flow equation 
Macroscopic models of Traffic flow [No. of lectures -10]: Empirical and theoretical 
models, Continuity equations, Solution to linear and non -linear partial differential 
equations, Two fluid model 
Microscopic Models of Traffic flow [No. of lectures -10]: Car following models, Response 
Stimulus model, Psychophysical model, stability, Advanced car following models  
Propagation of disturbance [No. of lectures – 6]: Non-linear traffic waves and 
acceleration of stream, Shockwave theory and applications 
Analysis of traffic flow [No. of lectures -10]: Accumulation diagrams, Incidents, 
Probabilistic analysis of traffic flow, Gap acceptance theory, Queuing theory and 
applications. 
 
Text Books 
1. Ni, D. Traffic flow Theory. BH, Elsevier, MA, USA. 
2. Adolf D. May. Traffic flow fundamentals. Copyright: Prentice Hall, Inc 
3. Nicholas J Garber and Lester A Hoel. Traffic and Highway Engineering. Copyright: 
Brooks/Cole-Wadsworth Group\Thomson learning 
4. Fred. L. Mannering, Walter P. Kilareski, and Scott S. Washburn. Principles of 
Highway Engineering and Traffic Analysis. Copyright: John Wiley and Sons, Inc. 
5. C. Jotin Khisty and B. Kent Lall. Transportation Engineering. Copyright; Pearson 
Education, Inc. 
 
Additional references: 
1. Kadiyali. L. R. (2016).Traffic Engineering and Transport Planning. Khanna 
Publishers 
2. Chakroborty, P., Animesh Das (2017). Principles of Transportation Engineering. 
Second Edition, PHI Learning Private Limited 
3. Saxena S. C. (2014). Textbook of Highway and Traffic engineering. CBS 
4. Samuel Morgan (2016) Traffic Engineering and Transport Planning. Williford Pr.  
5. Jaume Barceló. (2010) Fundamentals of Traffic Simulation. Springer. 
6. Roess, R.P., Prassas E. S., McShane W. R. (2010) Traffic Engineering. Pearson 
 
 
  
59 
 
 
Title Traffic System and Management Number CIE7XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech, M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type ME 
Prerequisite    
Objectives: The course will introduce students to: 
1. Traffic system characteristics 
2. Traffic control system 
3. Traffic studies and basic analysis 
4. Intelligent Transportation System (ITS) 
Learning Outcomes: At the end of the course, the student should be able to: 
1. Understand in-depth the data collection methods and analysis of various traffic flow 
parameters 
2. Design traffic control systems 
3. Have adequate exposure to various traffic management measures 
4. Understand the fundamentals and applications of ITS 
 
Contents 
Traffic Systems Characteristics [No. of lectures - 6]: User, Vehicle and Traffic 
characteristics 
Traffic Studies and Basic Analysis [No. of lectures -10]: Speed, journey time, and delay 
studies, Volume and occupancy studies, Origin -destination Studies, Parking studies, 
Accident Studies. Capacity and Level of Service (LOS) analysis 
Traffic Control System [No. of lectures -12]: Road markings – Principles of road 
markings, carriageway markings and object markings; Traffic signs – Importance of 
traffic signs, Types of traffic signs; Intersection control, Signal design - Illustration of 
signals, fixed time signals, signal design using IRC method and HCM method  
Traffic Management [No.of lectures -8]: Strategies and techniques, Traffic calming, 
congestion studies and road pricing.  
Intelligent Transportation system [No. of lect ures – 6]: User services and architecture, 
standards and evaluation, Public Transport and bus priority, Artificial intelligence in 
advanced traffic and ITS 
 
Text Books 
1. Nicholas J Garber and Lester A Hoel. Traffic and Highway Engineering. Copyright: 
Brooks/Cole-Wadsworth Group\Thomson learning 
2. Fred. L. Mannering, Walter P. Kilareski, and Scott S. Washburn. Principles of Highway 
Engineering and Traffic Analysis. Copyright: John Wiley and Sons, Inc. 
3. C. Jotin Khisty and B. Kent Lall. Transportation Engin eering. Copyright; Pearson 
Education, Inc. 
4. https://coeut.iitm.ac.in/ITS_synthesis.pdf 
5. Sussman, J. Perspectives on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS). New York, NY: 
Springer, 2005 
Additional references: 
1. Kadiyali. L. R. (2016).Traffic Engineering and Transport Planning. Khanna Publishers 
2. Chakroborty, P., Animesh Das (2017). Principles of Transportation Engineering. 
Second Edition, PHI Learning Private Limited 
3. Roess, R.P., Prassas E. S., McShane W. R. (2010) Traffic Engineering. Pearson 
 
 
  
60 
 
 
Title Soil Stabilization and Ground Improvement Number CIE7XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech, M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type ME 
Prerequisite    
Objectives: This course will introduce: 
1. Scopes of soil stabilization and ground improvement in various geotechnical 
projects. 
2. Different conventional and advanced method of ground improvement and their 
applications. 
3. Role of ground water and soil types on the stability of soil covers and grounds. 
Learning Outcomes: A graduate of this course will have a thorough knowledge of: 
1. Behaviour of soils under different environmental conditions and their compaction 
behavior. 
2. Role and planning of drainage to enhance stability of grounds. 
3. Different mechanical, chemical, and cmenting stabilization techniques regularly 
used in stabilization programs. 
4. Use of geosynthetics and influence of their properties on ground improvement. 
5. Elements of grouting and injection to increase soil stabilization. 
 
Contents 
 Formation and development of ground: Formation of rock, soil, and soil profile; Soil 
distribution in India; alteration of ground after formation; reclaimed soil; ground 
improvement potential (Lectures: 3) 
 Compaction: compaction mechanics; field procedure; surface compaction; selection 
of field compaction procedures; compaction quality control. (Lectures: 3) 
 Drainage methods:  seepage; filter requirements; groundwater; methods of 
dewatering systems; design steps for dewatering systems; drains. (Lectures: 5) 
 Precompression and vertical drains: compressibility of soils and consolidation; pre -
loading and surface fills; vertical dr ains; granular piles; dynamic consolidation; 
consolidation by electro-osmosis. (Lectures: 5) 
 Vibration methods: vibro-compression; vibro-displacement compression. (Lectures: 
5) 
 Grouting and injection:  aspects of grouting; grouting procedure; applications. 
(Lectures: 5) 
 Mechanical, cementing, and chemical stabilization: requirements of soil stabilization; 
mechanical stabilization; Portland cement stabilization; bituminous stabilization; 
chemical stabilization; construction methods. (Lectures: 4) 
 Geosynthetics: geosynthetic types; properties of geosynthetics; applications of 
geosynthetics (Lectures: 5) 
 Contemporary soil improvement techniques: soil reinforcement; soil nailing; thermal 
methods; backfill materials for retaining walls; improving rock stability an d quality. 
(Lectures: 5) 
 Case histories of ground improvement: traditional ground improvements adopted in 
weak soils in India and abroad; codal suggestions. (Lectures: 2) 
 
Text Books 
1. Hausmann, M.R. (1990). Engineering Principles of Ground Modification, McGraw-Hill 
International Editions. ISBN: 9780070272798. 
2. Dr. Purushottama Raj (2005). Ground Improvement Techniques. Laxmi 
Publications. ISBN: 9788170088370. 
3. Bowles J.E. (1997). Foundation Analysis and Design (5th Ed). Tata McGraw-Hill 
International Edition. ISBN 0-07-912247-7. 
 
Online course Material 
1. Ground Improvement Techniques by Dr. G.L. Sivakumar Babu on NTPEL. 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/108/105108075/ 
 
 
 
61 
 
 
Title Foundation Engineering Number CIE7XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure 
Engineering 
L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech, M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, 
Ph.D 
Type ME 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives: this course aims at : 
1. Introducing basic principles and methods of foundation design and constructions. 
2. Introducing different ambient conditions that influence the stability of a foundation 
in short and long-term. 
3. Introducing methods of stable foundations in earthquake prone areas.  
 
Learning Outcomes: Students will have the ability to 
1. Analyze the properties of soil and rock to design appropriate foundations.  
2. Analytical knowledge of short-term and long-term consolidation behavior of 
foundations. 
3. Device methods to protect new and historical foundations against decay and 
collapse. 
4. Design earthquake resistant foundation in different soils and rocks. 
5. Apply international and national codes to study soil behavior and design 
foundations. 
Contents 
 Shallow and deep foundation: selection of foundation type; shallow foundations; deep 
foundation. (Lectures: 3) 
 Bearing capacity of foundations:  Bearing capacity of shallow foundations; bearing 
capacity of deep foundations; lateral load capacity of deep foundations (Lectures: 3) 
 Settlement of foundations:  Collapsible soil; settlement of cohecionless  soil; other 
common causes of settlement; foundation on rock; allowable settlement. (Lectures: 
3) 
 Consolidation: laboratory consolidation test; immediate settlement; primary 
consolidation; rate of primary consolidation; secondary compression; consolidation 
of soil beneath shallow foundation; consolidation  of soil beneath deep foundation; 
settlement of unsaturated cohesive soil. (Lectures: 3) 
 Foundation of expansive soil:  expansion potential; basic expansive soil principles; 
prediction of foundation movement; foundation design for expansive soil; flatwork; 
expansive rock. (Lectures: 3) 
 Retaining walls: simple retaining wall without wall friction; simple retaining wall with 
friction; design and construction of retaining walls; restrained retaining walls; 
mechanically stabilized earth retaining walls; sheet pi le walls; temporary retaining 
walls; moisture migration through basement walls. (Lectures: 4) 
 Foundation deterioration and cracking: timber decay; sulfate attack on concrete; 
frost; historic structures; shrinkage cracking; moisture migration through slab -on-
grade foundations. (Lectures: 4) 
 Geotechnical earthquake engineering: seismological concepts; ground motion 
parameters; dynamic soil behavior; ground response analysis; liquefaction; slope 
stability. (Lectures: 4) 
 Seismic strengthening/retrofitting metho ds for foundations: earthquake structural 
damage; foundation settlement; retaining walls; foundation alternatives to mitigate 
earthquake effects. (Lectures: 4) 
 Grading and other soil improvement methods: grading; compaction; soil 
improvement methods. (Lectures: 4) 
 Foundation excavation, underpinning, and field load tests: foundation excavation and 
construction; field load tests; foundation underpinning; observational method. 
(Lectures: 4) 
62 
 
 Subsurface investigation and instrumentations: traditional in -situ in vestigations; 
advanced geophysical tests; field instrumentations. (Lectures: 3) 
 International building codes for foundations: general regulations for footing and 
foundations; foundation adjacent to slopes; retaining walls.  (Lectures: 3) 
  
Text Books 
1. Bowles JE (1997) Foundation Analysis and Design (5th Ed). Tata-McGraw Hill 
International Edition. ISBN 0-07-912247-7. 
2. Robert W. day (2010). Foundation Engineering Handbook (2nd Ed). McGraw-Hill 
Professional. ISBN 978-0-07-174010-4. 
3. Budhu. M (2012). Soil Mechanics and Foundations (3 rd Ed). John Wiley and Sons. 
ISBN: 978-0-470-55684-9. 
4. Robert W. day (2010). Foundation Engineering Handbook (2 nd Ed). McGraw-Hill 
Professional. ISBN 978-0-07-174010-4.Manjriker 
 
Additional references: 
Foundation Engineering (2018) by Prof. Kousik Deb on NPTEL. 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105105176/ 
 
 
 
 
  
63 
 
 
Title Reliability Engineering Number CIE7XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure 
Engineering 
L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech, M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, 
Ph.D 
Type ME 
Prerequisite Nil   
 
Objectives: This course aims at: 
1. Introducing basic principles of statistics, uncertainty and reliability analysis.  
2. Enhancing engineering knowledge and specialist techniques to prevent/reduce the 
likelihood of failures of structures. 
3. Introduction of different methods of reliability analysis in Civil Engineering.  
 
Learning Outcomes: Students will have the ability to: 
1. Analyze the statistical moments of input random variables and the output 
performance function.  
2. Determine the probability of failure, reliability index and safety factors of limit state 
functions. 
3. Analytical knowledge of different levels of reliability used for structures. 
4. Perform reliability based design on different limit states. 
5. Apply finite element based reliability analysis to structural components and 
systems. 
 
Contents: 
 Introduction to Reliability Engineering: Concepts of structural safety, limit state and 
reliability; types of uncertainty; reliability analysis and its importance. (Lectures: 2) 
 Basics of statistics and probability: Basic statistics; theory of probability; probability 
distribution function; hypothesis testing. (Lectures: 3) 
 Resistance paramet ers and distributions: Statistics of material properties and 
strength; dimensional variations; allowable stresses. (Lectures: 3)  
 Simulation based study of structural safety:  Monte Carlo method;  Latin hypercube 
sampling; advanced sampling techniques. (Lectures: 3) 
 Level 2 reliability methods:  Basic variables and failure surface; first order second 
moment method. (Lectures: 3) 
 Gradient based methods: first and second order methods; independent, correlated, 
normal and non-normal random variables based limit states. (Lectures: 5) 
 Response surface based methods: Conventional response surface method; advanced 
response surface methods with examples.  (Lectures: 4) 
 Reliability based design: Stochastic models of loads; determination of partial safety 
factors; code calibration; safety checking format. (Lectures: 4) 
 Reliability of structural systems:  System reliability – series and parallel; bounds on 
system reliability; modelling of structural systems. (Lectures: 3) 
 Advanced reliability methods:  Importance sampling method; subset simulation 
method; stochastic response surface method. (Lectures: 3) 
 Brief on advanced topics:  Fatigue reliability estimation; S -N curve approach; time -
dependent reliability. (Lectures: 3) 
 Design optimization: Introduction to the concept of design optimization; examples 
on solving reliability based design optimization problems. (Lectures: 3) 
 Application of reliability analysis and design: applications to steel, concrete, offshore 
structures etc. to determine probability of failure and safe design. (Lectures: 3) 
 
Text Books: 
1. P. Thoft -Christensen and M.J. Baker (1982) Structural Reliability: Theory and its 
Applications, Springer-Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg. ISBN 978-3-642-68699-3. 
64 
 
2. A.H.S. Ang and W. H. Tang (1984) Probability Concepts in Engineering Planning and 
Design Vol. II Decision, Risk and Reliability, John Wiley and Sons, New York. ISBN 
978-0-471-03201-4 
3. P. Thoft -Christensen and Y. Murotsu (1986) Applications of Structural Systems 
Reliability Theory, Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg. ISBN 978-3-642-82766-2. 
4. O. Ditlevsen and H.O. Madsen (1996) Structural Reliability Methods, John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd, Chichester. ISBN 978-0-471-96086-7.  
5. S.-K. Choi, R.V. Grandhi and R.A. Canfield (2007) Reliability-based Structural Design, 
Springer-Verlag, London. ISBN 978-1-84628-444-1. 
6. R. Ranganathan (2011) Structural Reliability Analysis and Design (3 rd Ed), Jaico  
Publishing House, Mumbai. ISBN 81-7224-851-2. 
7. R.E. Melchers and A.T. Beck (2018) Structural Reliability Analysis and Prediction (3rd 
Ed), John Wiley and Sons Ltd, Hoboken, NJ. ISBN 978-1-119-26599-3. 
 
Additional References: 
1. Reliability Engineering (2009) by Prof. G.L. Sivakumar Babu on NPTEL. 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/108/105108128/ 
2. Structural Reliability (2014) by Dr. Arunasis Chakraborty on NPTEL. 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/103/105103140/ 
3. Risk and Reliability of Offshore Structures (2016) by Prof. Srinivasan Chandrasekaran 
on NPTEL. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/114/106/114106041/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
65 
 
 
Title Structural Dynamics Number CIE7XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech, M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type ME 
Prerequisite Nil   
 
Objectives: This course aims at: 
1. Introducing the behaviour of structures (especially framed building) to various 
dynamic loads, viz. earthquake, machine vibration etc. 
2. Fundamental understanding to analyze structures subjected to dynamic excitation 
and computing quantities like displacements, forces, stresses etc. 
3. Analytical and numerical methods as well as procedures in a way that emphasize 
physical insight. 
4. Problem solving ability for dynamic response in Civil Engineering design. 
 
Learning Outcomes: Students will have the ability to: 
1. Establish dynamic equilibrium and equation of motion for structural systems.  
2. Analyze the dynamic response and stress generation in single and multi degree of 
freedom systems for different types of loading. 
3. Implement the basis for the classical energy formulations in dynamical systems. 
4. Model structural damping and solve problems in frequency as well as time domain.  
5. Solve the eigenvalue problems and gain knowledge on its useful properties. 
6. Device methods to protect new and existing structures against seismic collapse.  
7. Apply the structural dynamics theory to real-world problems like seismic analysis 
and design of structures. 
 
Contents: 
 Basics of structural dynamics: Introduction to dynamic loading and response; types 
of analysis - static and dynamic loads; degrees of freedom; lumped mass; types of 
mass-spring-damper system; formulation of equation of motion for structural 
dynamics using direct equilibration, pri nciple of virtual displacement and Hamilton’s 
principle. (Lectures: 4) 
 Free vibration of single degree of freedom (SDOF) system: Undamped free vibration 
and its solution; natural period and frequency; energy in free vibration; damped free 
vibration; types of damping; concept of logarithmic decrement. (Lectures: 4) 
 Forced vibration of SDOF  system: Undamped forced vibration and its solution; 
amplitude and phase angle; dynamic amplification factor; damped forced vibration. 
(Lectures: 3) 
 Force transmission and vibration measurement: Resonant frequency and half power 
band width; force transmission and isolation; design of vibration measuring 
instruments. (Lectures: 3) 
 Response to harmonic and periodic motions: Response of SDOF systems to harmonic 
loads and periodic excitations; Fourier series representation. (Lectures: 4) 
 Response to arbitrary motions: Response of SDOF systems to unit impulse excitation, 
arbitrary force (solution using Duhamel's integral), step and ramp forces, rectangular 
pulse and half sinusoidal waves. (Lectures: 4) 
 Numerical methods of solution:  Determining the dynamics response usi ng methods 
such as time stepping methods, central difference method and Newmark's method. 
(Lectures: 4) 
 Response spectrum: Concept of response spectrum; uses of response spectrum; 
complex frequency transfer function; development of tripartite plot; base sh ear and 
bending moment; response of structure in frequency domain. (Lectures: 4) 
 Multi-degree of freedom (MDOF) systems: Equation of motion for MDOF system; 
solution of equation, matrix properties; natural frequencies and mode shapes; static 
condensation; modal orthogonality; mode superposition analysis of MDOF system; 
approximate method for finding natural frequency. (Lectures: 5)  
66 
 
 Earthquake response of MDOF systems: Time history analysis; response spectrum 
analysis. (Lectures: 2) 
 Dynamic response of cont inuous systems: Vibration of continuous systems; axial 
vibration of prismatic bar; flexural vibration of beams; shear and bending behaviour; 
generalized SDOF. (Lectures: 3) 
 Applications: Introduction to finite element method; formation of element stiffness , 
mass and force matrices; examples for seismic analysis and response. (Lectures: 2)   
 
Text Books: 
1. J.M. Biggs (1964) Introduction to Structural Dynamics, McGraw Hill, NY. ISBN 07 -
005255-7. 
2. R.W. Clough and J. Penzien (1993) Dynamics of Structures (2nd Ed), McGraw Hill Inc 
Editor. ISBN 0-07-011392-0. 
3. A.K. Chopra (2017) Dynamics of Structures Theory and Application to Earthquake 
Engineering (5th Ed), Prentice Hall, NJ. ISBN 978-0-134-55512-6. 
4. A.K. Jain (2017) Dynamics of Structures with MATLAB ® Applications, Pearson 
Education, Chennai, India. ISBN 978-9-332-55855-7 
5. M. Paz and Y.H. Kim (2019) Structural Dynamics Theory and Computation (6 th Ed), 
Springer Nature, Switzerland. ISBN 978-3-319-94742-6. 
 
Additional References: 
1. Structural Dynamics (2012) by Dr. P radipta Banerji on NPTEL. 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/101/105101006/ 
2. Structural Dynamics (2016) by Prof. Ramancharala Pradeep Kumar on NPTEL. 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/106/105106151/ 
3. Structural Dynamics for Civil Engineers - SDOF Systems (2019) by Prof. Riya 
Catherine George on NPTEL. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/104/105104189/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
67 
 
 
Title Advanced Mechanics of Solids Number MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type ME 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
1. Enable students to learn advanced concepts of stress analysis 
2. Apply concepts to analysis of mechanical systems such as rotating disks, thick 
cylinders etc. 
Learning Outcomes  
1. Develop Ability to solve advanced stress analysis problems using analytical and 
numerical methods 
2. Ability to formulate and solve 3D problems in stress analysis 
Contents 
 
1. Introduction to Cartesian tensors, Stress: Normal and shear stress, Equilibrium 
equations (force and moment), Symmetry of shear tensor, Equilibrium at boundary 
(Cauchy Equation). 2 -D problems Plane stress, Stress transformation, Principal 
stresses, maximum shear stress, Mohr’s circle (7 Lectures) 
2. Displacements and strains, Green’s strain, Compatibility condition, Plane strain 
Problems, Strain transformation, Strain gage and rosette (5 Lectures) 
3. Structural Approximations: Physical and mathematical. Structura l elements -bars, 
beams, plates, membrane, shear panel, shells (1 Lectures) 
4. Mechanical behavior of Engineering Materials, Effect of Temperature, Anisotropic, 
Isotropic, Orthotropic materials, Failure Criteria (Distortion strain energy, Octahedral 
shear stress) Maximum normal stress, Maximum Shear stress (Tresca), Maximum 
distortion energy (von-Mises and Hencky) (4 Lectures) 
5. Theory of Elasticity, Plane Stress Problem with Stress formulation in 2-D, Plane Strain 
Problem with Stress Formulation in 2 -D, Airy’s s tress function, stress, strain and 
equilibrium in polar coordinates, Displacement formulation with plane stress, St. 
Venant’s Principle (4 Lectures) 
6. Bending and extension of beams, stress -resultants, Equilibrium equations in terms 
of deformation with transverse and axial load (3 Lectures) 
7. Torsion of slender bodies (beams), Prandtl stress function formulation, Membrane 
analogy, Closed form beam torsion analytical solution, Warping function formulation, 
Thin Walled open sections, Torsion constants for rolled and extruded beams, Thin 
walled closed sections, Shear flow (8 Lectures) 
8. Beam shearing stresses due to shear forces, Shear Centre (3 Lectures) 
9. Euler Buckling (3 Lectures) 
10. Principle of virtual-work (4 Lectures) 
Text Books 
1. Srinath, L.S. (2009), Advanced Solid Mechanics, Tata McGraw-Hill 
2. Timoshenko, S.P., and Goodier, J.N. (1980), Theory of Elasticity, Tata McGraw- Hill 
3. Sadd, M. H. (2006), Elasticity: Theory, Applications and Numerics, Academic Press  
Online course Material 
1. http://nptel.ac.in/courses/105106049/ 
 
 
 
 
  
68 
 
 
Title Substation Infrastructure Number EE7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type ME 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide exposure to layout of various components of substation and design its 
infrastructure. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Develop the layout of a substation and design the substation infrastructure 
 
Contents  
 
Substation Layout:  Substation design considerations, layouts - various bus 
configurations and space requirements (5 lectures) 
Auxiliary Power:  Battery and charger configurations, battery capacity, battery sizing 
calculations, AC power supplies, auxiliary transformation conn ections, earthing 
transformer (5 lectures) 
Current and Voltage Transformers:  Types, design and construction constructions,  (4 
lectures) 
Insulators: Insulator materials, types, design consideration, testing (4 lectures) 
Earthing and Bonding:  Touch and step  voltage, earthing materials, earth resistance, 
earth potential rise, protective multiple earthing (5 lectures) 
Switchgear: Introduction, switches, disconnectors, contactors, introduction to operating 
mechanism and arc quenching (5 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Bayliss,C., Hardy,B., (2012), Transmission and Distribution Electrical Engineering, 4th 
Edition, Newnes publications 
2. Rao,S., (1992), Electrical Substation Engineering and Practice Engineering & Practice 
EHV-AC, HVDC AND SF6-GIS, 3rd Edition, Khanna publications 
 
 
 
  
69 
 
 
Title Gas Insulated Substation Number EE7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-Ph.D, Ph.D Type ME 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide exposure  to of gas insulated substations (GIS), its design, testing, and 
diagnostics methods 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Design and test a gas insulated substation 
 
Contents  
 
Introduction: Features, economics, arrangement, and components of gas insulated 
substations, comparison with air insulated substations (4 lectures) 
Introduction to SF 6: physical, chemical, and electrical properties, handling, 
specifications for GIS applications  (3 lectures) 
Design of GIS: Ratings of components, estimation of electric stress, design aspects of 
GIS components, insulation design, insulation coordination, grounding systems (6 
lectures) 
Testing: GIS testing, on -site tests, condition monitoring and diagnosti c methods (4 
lectures) 
Problems and Diagnostics:  Particles and their effects, SF 6 gas decomposition, 
characteristics of imperfections in insulation, insulation diagnostics methods, partial 
discharge in GIS and its detection (8 lectures) 
Fast transient phenomena: Origin, characteristics, and effects of very fast transient 
overvoltages (3 lectures) 
 
 
Textbook  
1. Naidu,M.S., (2008), Gas Insulated Substations , I.K. International Publishing House 
Pvt Ltd 
2. Koch,H., (2014), GIS Gas Insulated Substations, IEEE Press and John Wiley & Sons 
Ltd 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
70 
 
 
Title Machine Learning-1 Number CS 7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type ME 
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives: The Instructor will: 
1. Provide motivation and understanding of the need and importance of Machine 
Learning in today’s world. 
2. Provide details about various algorithms in Machine Learning 
 
Learning Outcomes: The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Develop a sense of Machine Learning in the modern context, and independently 
work on problems relating to Machine Learning. 
2. Design and program efficient algorithms related to Machine Learning, train models, 
conduct experiments, and deliver ML-based applications 
 
Contents  
 
Fractal 1  
 Introduction: Motivation, Different types of learning, Linear regression, Logistic 
regression (2 lectures) 
 Gradient Descent: Introduction, Stochastic Gradient Descent, Subgradients, 
Stochastic 
 Gradient Descent for risk minimization (2 lectures)  
 Support Vector Machines: Hard SVM, Soft SVM, Optimality conditions, Duality, 
Kernel trick, Implementing Soft SVM with Kernels (4 lectures) 
 Decision Trees: Decision Tree algorithms, Random forests (2 lectures) 
 Nearest Neighbour: k-nearest neighbour, Curse of dimensionality (1 lecture) 
 Neural Networks: Feedforward neural networks, Expressive power of neural 
networks, SGD and Backpropagation (3 lectures) 
 
Fractal 2  
 Clustering: Linkage -based clustering algorithms, k -means algorithm, Spectral 
clustering (2 lectures) 
 Dimensionality reduction: Principal Component Analysis, Random projections, 
Compressed sensing (2 lectures) 
 Generative Models: Maximum likelihood estimator, Naive Bayes, Linear Discriminant 
Analysis, 
 Latent variables and Expectation -maximization algorithm, Bayesian learning (4 
lectures) 
 Feature Selection and Generation: Feature selection, Feature transformations, 
Feature learning (3 lectures) 
 Model selection and validation: Validation for model  selection, k -fold cross -
validation, 
 Training-Validation-Testing split, Regularized loss minimization (3 lectures) 
 
Fractal 3 
 Statistical Learning Framework: PAC learning, Agnostic PAC learning, 
 Bias-complexity tradeoff, No free lunch theorem, VC dimension , Structural risk 
minimization, Adaboost (7 lectures) 
 Foundations of Deep Learning: DNN, CNN, RNN, Autoencoders (7 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Shalev-Shwartz,S., Ben-David,S., (2014), Understanding Machine Learning: From 
Theory to Algorithms, Cambridge University Press. 
Reference books: 
71 
 
1. Mitchell Tom (1997). Machine Learning, Tata McGraw-Hill. 
 
Self-Learning Materials 
1. Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, 
https://see.stanford.edu/Course/CS229 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
72 
 
 
Title Artificial Intelligence – 1 Number CS 7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type ME 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives: The Instructor will: 
1. Cover various paradigms that come under the broad umbrella of AI, with some of 
them being covered in depth 
 
Learning Outcomes: The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Develop an understanding of where and how AI can be used 
 
Contents  
 Introduction (1 lecture) 
 Propositional logic (8 lectures) 
 Search: Uninformed strategies (BFS, DFS, Dijkstra), Informed strategies (A* 
search, heuristic functions, hill-climbing), Adversarial search (Minimax algorithm, 
Alpha-beta pruning) (10 lectures) 
 Predicate logic: Knowledge representation, Resolution (6 lectures) 
 Rule-based systems: Natural language parsing, Context free grammar (3 lectures) 
 Constraint satisfaction problems (4 lectures) 
 Planning: State space search, Planning Graphs, Partial order planning (4 lectures) 
 Uncertain Reasoning: Probabilist ic reasoning, Bayesian Networks, Dempster -
Shafer theory, 
 Fuzzy logic (6 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Russel,S., and Norvig,P., (2015), Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, 3rd 
Edition, Prentice Hall. 
 
Reference books: 
1. Research literature 
 
Self-Learning Materials 
1. Department of Computer Science, University of California, Berkeley, 
http://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLD52D2B739E4D1C5F 
2. NPTEL: Artificial Intelligence, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106105077/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
73 
 
 
Title Wave Energy Conversion  Number  
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P-D [C] 1-0-0 [1] 
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type ME 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives: this course aims at: 
1. Introducing elements of wave energy, wave energy converters (WECs), conversion 
systems, its economics, and future potential. 
 
Learning Outcomes: Students will have the ability to 
1.  Understand the geographical distribution of wave energy potential.  
2. Classify wave energy conversion process, and choose different near -shore to offshore 
conversion devices. 
3. Understand principles of different components of power conversion systems.  
4. Develop cost & performance analysis of shoreline, near-shore, and offshore systems. 
5. Understand positive and negative impacts of such systems and methods to minimize 
them. 
 
Contents 
 Ocean waves Wave and Wave Energy: Origin and description of waves; Wave 
climatology and resource distribution; Wave energy resource assessment and 
development; Wave power activities across the globe. 
 Wave energy conversion system and power transfer systems: Conversion 
technology; conversion development; Mechanical interface; energy storage; Electric 
power conversion; Transmission to grid 
 Economics: Cost of wave energy; capital, operating, and generatin g cost; economics 
of wave-powered desalination. 
 Environmental and socioeconomics implications:  Benefits; Impacts; Impact 
assessment; Other considerations.  
 
Text Book 
1. Bhattacharyya R, McCormick ME (2003). Wave Energy Conversion. Volume 6. Elsevier 
Ocean Engineering Book Series. Elsevier.  ISBN: 0 08 044212 9 
 
Reference Books 
1. Arthur Pecher, Jens Peter Kofoed, (2017) Handbook of Ocean wave Energy, Springer 
2. T.W. Thorpe, (1999) A Brief Review of Wave Energy, UK Department of Trade and 
Industry, ETSU-R120, 25 May 99 
 
Online Material: 
1. https://nptel.ac.in/content/storage2/courses/108108078/pdf/chap8/teach_slides08.pdf  
 
 