Source: http://intra.iitj.ac.in/acad_website/intra/List%20of%20Institute%20wide%20common%20courses%20and%20course%20contents%20from%202nd%20year%20onwards_31082020.pdf
================================================================================

443  
 
List of Institute wide common courses and course contents 
I. List of Institute Core and Programmed linked Courses 
 Course Name Offered for 
Programme 
Offering 
Semester 
Offering 
Department 
A. Engineering Courses 
1 Data Structures and Algorithms 
(Programme Core for all Depts.) 
EE, CS, AI, ES III CS 
BB, ME, CI, CH, MT IV 
2 Introduction to Machine Learning BB, ME, CI, CH, MT III CS/EE 
3 Pattern Recognition and Machine 
Learning 
EE, CS, AI, ES IV CS 
4 Signals and Systems EE, CS, AI, ES, BB III EE 
ME, CI, CH, MT IV 
5 Thermodynamics EE, ME, CI, CH, MT III ME 
CS, AI, ES, BB IV 
B. Programme Link Mathematics Courses 
6 Probability, Statistics and Stochastic 
Processes 
EE, CS, AI, ES, BB, 
CI, CH 
III MA 
7 Scientific Computations ME, MT III MA 
C. Programme-Linked Science Courses 
8 Condensed Matter Physics MT III PH 
9 Foundations of Quantum Information 
Processing 
EE, CS, AI III PH 
10 Metrology + Statistical Mechanics ME III PH 
11 Physics of Complex Liquid CH III PH 
12 Analytical Mechanics CI III PH 
13 Nanoscience BB III CY 
D. Additional courses for Engineering Science Double B.Tech. 
14 Modern Physics ES III PH 
15 Design and Analysis of Experiments ES IV MA 
16 Embedded Systems and IoT ES IV EE 
17 Modelling and Simulation ES IV EE/ME 
E. Non-graded HSS Course 
18 Introduction to Profession All III UCRC 
444  
19 Professional Ethics I All V HS 
20 Professional Ethics II All VI HS 
E. Other courses common to all 
21 Environmental Science All VII CI 
 
II. List of Material Science Fractals 
 Fractal Name Offered for Offering 
Semester 
Offering Department 
1 Electronic Materials CS, AI IV PH 
2 Magnetic Materials EE III PH 
3 Energy Materials EE, CS, AI III MT 
4 Computational Material 
Design 
EE, CS, AI, ES III MT 
5 Polymers MT, CH, CI, BB, 
MT 
IV CH 
6 Materials Selection ME, BB, ES IV MT 
7 Structure of Materials ME, BB, CI, ES IV MT 
8 Physical Metallurgy ME, MT IV MT 
9 Corrosion CH, CI, MT IV MT 
10 Suspensions and colloids CH IV CY 
445  
Title Data Structures and Algorithms Course No. CSxxx 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–2 [4] 
Offered for B.Tech of all branches Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Introduction to Computer Programming   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. To introduce and practice the implementation of various data structures used for 
indexing, searching, and sorting operations. 
2. To introduce basic mathematical techniques for algorithm analysis and design. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to: 
1. Ability to design and implement appropriate data structures for indexing, searching,  and 
sorting operations for real-world problems. 
2. Designing of new algorithms using standard data structures. 
3. Analyzing the time and space complexities of standard data structures and basic 
algorithms. 
 
Contents 
Algorithm analysis and complexity: Big/little -Oh, Omega, Theta notation, Recurrence 
equations (2 Lectures) 
Abstract data types: Linear data structures, Tree, Binary trees, Tree traversal, Applications (7 
Lectures) 
Search trees: Binary search trees, Balanced search trees, AVL trees, B-Trees (5 Lectures) 
Heaps: Binary Heap, Heap order property and min/max heaps (3 Lectures) 
Sets: Disjoint set ADT, Basic operations on Sets, Union/Find Algorithm (2 Lectures) 
Greedy techniques for algorithm design (1 lecture) 
Sorting algorithms: Bubble sort, Selection sort, Bucket sort, Insertion sort, Overview of Divide- 
and-conquer, Quick sort, Merge sort (6 Lectures) 
Hashing: Hash tables and operations, Hash function, Open and closed hashing, External and 
internal hashing, Collision resolving methods, Rehashing (5 Lectures) 
Dynamic programming for problem solving (3 Lectures) 
Graph algorithms: Definitions, Branch and bound, Backtracking, Representation, Traversal, 
Shortest-path algorithms, Minimum Spanning Tree algorithm, Topological sorting (8 
Lectures) 
 
Laboratory Classes (12-13 Classes) 
1. Implementation of data structures using C programming language. 
2.  Practically verifying and comparing run-time performance and asymptotic behavior of 
various data structures and related algorithms. 
3. Applications of data structures from real-life scenarios. 
 
Text Book 
1. M. A. WEISS (2002), Data Structures and Algorithm Analysis in C, Addison-Wesley, 
2nd Edition. 
 
Reference Books 
1. T. H. CORMEN, C. E. LEISERSON, R.L. RIVEST, C. STEIN (2009),Introduction to 
Algorithms, MIT Press, 3rd Edition. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
1. Data Structures and Algorithms, NPTEL Course Material, Department Computer Science 
and Engineering, IIT Delhi: https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106102064/ 
446  
Course Title Introduction to Machine Learning Course No. CS2xx 
Department CSE/EE Structure (L-T-P-C) 3-0-2 
Offered for B.Tech (all other branches) Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Introduction to Programming   
Objectives: 
1. To familiarize with the fundamental machine learning algorithms. 
2. To study applications of machine learning algorithms in different disciplines. 
a. 
Learning Outcomes: 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Ability to formulate a machine learning problem 
2. Ability to select an appropriate machine learning algorithm for analysing different types of 
data. 
3. Ability to apply pattern analysis tools to practical applications and detect patterns in the data. 
 
Contents: 
● Preliminaries: ML pipeline, training, testing, Learning Paradigms: Supervised, unsupervised, 
and reinforcement, Representation of samples, Correlation and covariance, probability, 
distributions, hypothesis evaluation, Data processing and normalization, Bias -Variance (8 
lectures) 
● Regression and Supervised Classifiers (18 lectures): 
○ Logistic and Linear Regression (2), 
○ Decision Tree, Boosting and Bagging, K-NN (5) 
○ Bayesian Decision Theory, MLE Parameter Estimation (5) 
○ EM-Algorithms (2 lectures) 
○ SVM (4 lectures) 
● Linear Decision boundaries, Discriminant Analysis, and Subspace Representation (PCA)  (4 
lectures) 
● Unsupervised Learning: K-means and Graph-based Clustering (3 lectures) 
● Time series: Introduction to Time Series and Stochastic Processes, HMM (3) 
● Artificial Neural Networks, Autoencoder, and CNN, Regularization Techniques (6  lectures) 
 
Lab: Programming labs on Normalization, Visualization (Visualization Tools: regression plots, 
scatter plot, tableau), Distribution, Evaluation, Regressions, Decision Tree, Bayes, PCA, LDA, ANN, 
K-means, Graph-based Clustering, HMM, 
Case Studies from different departments: 
1. BSB: Identification of protein secondary structure (helices, sheets, and coil), or functional 
categories representing binding sites, cleavage sites, or residues being posttranslationally 
modified using Neural networks. 
2. ME: Machine Learning for Predictive Maintenance, where sensed machine data can be used 
in learning whether routine maintenance of the machine is required or not: Classification 
problem 
3. Chemical Engg: Application of ML to predict life cycle of Lithium Ion Battery. (Challenge: 
Even with the same chemistry and same operating conditions, there is considerable 
variability in the life cycle of the lithium ion battery. 
4. Materials: Finding unprec edentedly low -thermal-conductivity half-Heusler semiconductors 
via high-throughput 
materials modeling,. 
Text Book 
1. Machine Learning, T. M. MITCHELL, McGraw Hill Education, 2017 
Reference Book 
1. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, C. M. BISHOP, Springer-Verlag New York, 2006 
2. Pattern Classification, R. O. DUDA, P. E. HART, D. G. STORK, Wiley-Blackwell, 2000 
Self-learning Material 
1. Introduction to Machine Learning, NPTEL Course Material, Department Computer Science 
and Engineering, IIT Madras: http//nptel.ac.in/courses/106106139/ 
2. Machine Learning, Stanford University: https://see.stanford.edu/Course/CS229 
 
 
Course Title Pattern Recognition and Machine 
Learning 
Course No. CSL2xx 
447  
Department Computer Science and Engineering Structure (L-T-P 
[C]) 
3-0-2 
Offered for B.Tech (CSE, AI&DS, EE) Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Introduction to Computer Sc., 
Probability, Statistics and Stochastic 
Processes 
Antirequisite Introduction to Machine 
Learning 
 
Objectives 
1. To understand various key paradigms for pattern classification and machine learning 
approaches 
2. To familiarize with the mathematical and statistical techniques used in pattern recognition 
and machine learning. 
3. To understand and differentiate among various pattern recognition and machine learning 
techniques. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. To formulate a machine learning problem 
2. Select an appropriate pattern analysis tool for analyzing data in a given feature space. 
3. Apply pattern recognition and machine learning techniques such as classification and feature 
selection to practical applications and detect patterns in the data. 
 
Contents 
 
Introduction: Definitions, Datasets for Pattern Recognition, Different Paradigms of Pattern 
Recognition and Machine Learning, Data Normalization, Hypothesis Evaluation, VC-Dimensions and 
Distribution, Bias-Variance Tradeoff, Regression (Linear), Regularization (8 Lectures) 
Discriminative Methods: Distance-based methods, Linear Discriminant Functions, Decision Tree, 
Random Decision Forest and Boosting (5 Lectures) 
Bayes Decision Theory: Bayes decision rule, Minimum error rate classification, Normal density 
and discriminant functions, Bayesian networks (7 Lectures) 
Parameter Estimation: Maximum Likelihood and Bayesian Parameter Estimation (3 Lectures) 
Feature Selection and Dimensionality Reduction:PCA, LDA, SFFS, SBFS (4 Lectures) 
Artificial Neural Networks: MLP, Backprop, and RBF-Net (4 Lectures) 
Kernel Machines: Kernel Tricks, Support Vector Machines (primal and dual forms), K-SVR, K-PCA 
(6 Lectures) 
Clustering: k-means clustering, Gaussian Mixture Modeling, EM-algorithm (5 Lectures) 
 
Laboratory 
Programming labs on Normalization, Visualization, Evaluation, Regressions, Decision Tree, Bayes, 
Parameter Estimation, PCA, LDA, ANN, SVM, K-means, GMM, Feature Selection 
 
Text Book 
1. R. O. DUDA, P. E. HART, D. G. STORK (2000), 
2. , Wiley-Blackwell, 2nd Edition. 
 
Reference Books 
1. C. M. BISHOP (2006), Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, Springer-Verlag New 
York, 1st Edition. 
2. T. M. MITCHELL (2017), Machine Learning, McGraw Hill Education, 1st Edition. 
 
Self-learning Material 
3. Introduction to Machine Learning, NPTEL Course Material, Department Computer Science 
and Engineering, IIT Madras: http//nptel.ac.in/courses/106106139/ 
4. Machine Learning, Stanford University: https://see.stanford.edu/Course/CS229 
448  
Title Signals and Systems Number EEL2XX 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–1–0 [4] 
Offered for B. Tech. Type IE 
Prerequisites    
Objectives 
The Instructor would: 
1. Familiarize students with the fundamentals of continuous-time and discrete-time linear 
systems, and their response analysis 
2. Provide understanding frequency-domain transforms and their real-world applications 
3. Discuss the applications from the area of engineering and physics 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students would be able to: 
1. Compute the response and system functions of LTI systems in various domains 
2. Solve basic real-world interdisciplinary problems involving time-domain or frequency analysis 
of signals 
 
Contents 
Signals and Systems (Continuous and Discrete Time) [10 lectures]: 
Description and Classification of signals, signal operations in time domain [4L], 
Sampling, Description and Classification of LTI System, Properties of LTI system [4L], 
Impulse response, Convolution and Correlation[2L]. 
Frequency Domain Representation of Signals [12 lectures]: 
Fourier series representation of periodic signals, convergence of Fourier Series & Gibbs 
phenomenon [3L], 
Fourier Transform, Fourier transform of periodic signals, properties of Fourier transform [3L], 
Laplace Transform, Z-Transform, region of convergence & properties [3L], 
Rational System functions, Inverse Laplace and Z-Transform of Rational Functions and 
applications [3L] 
LTI systems [12 lectures] : 
Difference and differential equation representation, block diagram representation [4 L], 
Transfer function and convolution, poles and zeros, step response [3L], 
Natural Response of 1st and 2nd Order Systems, Sinusoidal steady-state and Frequency 
Response [5L] 
Applications: [8 lectures]: 
Applications from the area of condition monitoring, Predictive Operations and Maintenance, 
Process Control [4L], 
ECG Signal Filtering and Denoising, Seismic Signal Processing, and few examples related to 
2D,3D, and speech signal processing [4L] 
 
Text Book 
1. Oppenheim, A. & Wilsky, A. S., Signals and Systems, 2nd Edition, Prentice-Hall 
 
Reference Books 
1. Lathi, B. P., (2009), Principles of Linear Systems and Signals, 2nd Edition, Oxford University 
Press 
2. Haykin, S. & Veen, B. V., (2008), Signals and Systems, 2nd Edition, Wiley 
3. Dutta Roy, S. C., Chandra, S., (2018), Circuits, Systems and Signal Processing: A Tutorials 
Approach, 1st Edition, Springer 
 
Self-Learning Material 
1. Dutta Roy, S. C., Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, Signals and 
Systems,https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLC6210462711083C4  
2. Venkatesan, K. S., Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Signals and Systems, NPTEL, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117/104/117104074/ 
449  
Title Thermodynamics Number MEL2XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–1–0 [4] 
Offered for All B.Tech (ME) Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
1. To understand thermodynamics laws and various thermodynamic processes 
2. To comprehend work producing and work consuming cycles 
3. To inculcate the importance of change of state responsible for physical and chemical 
changes. 
4. To introduce broader aspects of thermodynamics across disciplines and applicability of 
laws of thermodynamics and entropy principle in the areas ranging from design of prime 
movers to design of algorithms. 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Ability to effectively apply laws of thermodynamics in the practice of engineering. 
2. Capability to assess and quantify thermodynamic efficiencies using the second law of 
thermodynamics. 
3. Ability to conduct comprehensive and rigorous treatment of classical thermodynamics while 
retaining an engineering perspective 
Contents 
Implication of Thermodynamics and its scope in various disciplines [2 Lectures] : Mechanical 
engineering applications, Computer science applications, Electrical Engineering  applications, 
Biological science applications, Chemical engineering applications. 
Basic concepts [2 Lectures]: Thermodynamic system, Properties, State, Process, 
Thermodynamic equilibrium, Pressure measurement, Zeroth law, Temperature 
measurement. 
Concept of energy and energy transfer[7 Lectures]: Work and Heat, Internal energy, First Law 
of Thermodynamics, Work transfer and its value for different processes, Heat transfer, state 
functions, Equation of state for ideal and real gases, Gas mixtures; Differential form of First 
Law, First Law and various Processes. 
Thermodynamic properties of pure substance[4 Lectures]: Phase change process of pure 
substance and their property diagram, Use of steam table and Mollier diagram. 
Energy analysis of closed and open systems [8 Lectures]: First law analysis for closed systems, 
Steady flow energy equation, Flow processes, Throttling process, Joule -Thomson effect, 
Energy analysis of open systems, and Analysis of First law for unsteady flow. 
Second law of thermodynamics [4 Lectures]: Reversible and Irreversible processes, Kelvin - 
Planck and Clausius statement, Heat engines, Heat pumps, Carnot cycle. 
Entropy [9 Lectures]: Definitions of entrop y, statistical definition of pressure, temperature, 
entropy, Change of entropy for various processes, machine learning and coding application 
examples, Equilibrium, Spontaneity relations for Entropy, Helmholtz free energy, Gibbs free 
energy. 
Thermodynamic property relations [3 Lectures]: Maxwell relations, Clausius -Clapeyron 
equation 
Exergy [3 Lectures]: Definition of exergy, second law efficiency, Irreversibility, Exergy balance. 
Text Book 
1. Moran, M. J. & Shapiro, H. N., (2011), Fundamentals of Engineering Thermodynamics, 
7th Edition, Wiley. 
2. Cengel, Y. A. & Boles, M. A., (2010), Thermodynamics: An Engineering Approach, 
McGraw Hill Education 
3. Sonntag, R. E. & Wylen, V., (1998), Fundamentals of Thermodynamics, Wiley 
4. Zemansky M., (2017), Heat and Thermodynamics, McGrawhill 
Self-Learning Material 
1. Prof. Keith A. Nelson & Prof. Moungi Bawendi., Thermodynamics and Chemical Kinetics, 
MIT OpenCourseWare, Link: https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/chemistry/5-60- 
thermodynamics-kinetics-spring-2008/ 
450  
Title Probability, Statistics & Stochastic 
Processes 
Number MAL2XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3-1-0-0 [4] 
Offered for B.Tech BSBE, CSE, EE, DS&AI, CHE, CIE, ES Type Program 
Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Demonstrate the basic principles of probability theory and random variables. 
2.  Demonstrate the use of various families of probability distributions to model various 
types of data. 
3. Introduce the concept of stochastic process and its application. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to: 
1. Understand probability theory and develop the mathematical foundation of random 
variables. 
2. Understand random sampling, theory of estimation and testing of hypotheses. 
3. Understand the concept of stochastic processes and demonstrate the specific applications 
to Poisson and Gaussian processes. 
Contents 
Probability Spaces and Random Variables [16 lectures]: Axioms of probability, conditional 
probability, Independence, Bayes’ rule, Random variable, Some common discrete and continuous 
distributions, Distribution of Functions of Random Variable, Two and higher dimensional 
distributions, Functions of random variables, Conditional distributions, Laws of large numbers, 
Central limit theorem. 
 
Estimation and Test of Hypothesis [12 lectures]: Parameter Estimation, Maximum Likelihood 
Estimator [4 lecture], Confidence Interval [2 lecture], Hypothesis Testing [6 lecture].  
 
Stochastic Processes [14 Lectures]: Definition of Stochastic process, Classification and properties 
of stochastic processes, Simple Markovian stochastic processes, Gaussian processes, Stationary 
processes, Discrete and continuous time Markov chains, ergodicity. 
 
Textbook 
1. Ross, S. M., (2010), A First Course in Probability, Pearson Prentice Hall 
2. Ross, S. M., (2012), Introduction to probability and statistics for engineers and scientists, 
Elsevier 
3. Castaneda, L.B., Arunachalam, V. and Dharmaraja, S., (2012), Introduction to Probability 
and Stochastic Processes with Applications, John Wiley & Sons. 
4. Papoulis, A., (1991), Probability, Random Variables, and Stochastic Processes, McGraw - 
Hill. 
Reference Books 
1.  Rohatgi, V. K. & Saleh, A.K.M.E., (2011), An Introduction to Probability and Statistics, 
Wiley 
2. Casella, G. and Berger, R. (2002). Statistical Inference, Cengage Learning 
3. Ross M.S., (2008), Stochastic Processes, John Wiley and Sons. 
4.  Hoel, P.G., Port, S.C. & Stone, C.J. (1986) Introduction to Stochastic Processes, 
Houghton Mifflin Company 
Self-Learning Material 
1. G. Srinivasan, IIT Madras, Introduction to probability and 
Statistics,https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111/106/111106112/ 
2. S. Dharmaraja, IIT Delhi, Introduction to Probability Theory and Stochastic 
Processes,https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111/102/111102111/ 
451  
Title Scientific Computations Number MAL2XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D 
[C] 
3-0-2 [4] 
Offered for B.Tech ME, MT Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Demonstrate the validity and error in the numerical results 
2. Explain numerical techniques for a variety of problems 
3. Introduce how to solve numerically algebraic equations, linear systems of equations, 
approximation and ordinary differential equations. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to 
1. Develop an understanding of numerical error and applicability of a particular method. 
2.  Solve numerically algebraic equations, linear systems of equations and ordinary 
differential equations. 
3. Carry out numerical interpolation, differentiation and integration. 
 
Content 
Errors in computation [2 Lecture]: Numerical Algorithms and errors, source and types of errors, 
error propagation, floating point representation, rounding error and floating point arithmetic.  
Roots of equation [8 Lecture]: Iterative methods, order of conve rgence, Iterative methods for 
roots of nonlinear system of equations. 
Linear systems of equations [8 Lecture]: Direct and iterative methods (Jacobi, Gauss Seidel), rate 
of convergence of iterative methods, Condition number, Power and inverse power methods for 
eigenvalue problems, matrix factorization schemes (LU, QR, spectral, Schur, polar,  SVD). 
Interpolation [7 Lecture]: Lagrange, Newton divided difference formula,  Newton’s interpolations, 
errors in interpolation. 
Differentiation and Integration [7 Lecture]: Differentiation using interpolation formulas, 
Integration using interpolation, Newton-Cotes formulas, Gauss quadrature rules. 
Ordinary differential equations [4 Lecture]: Taylor series method, Euler’s Method, Modified Euler’s 
Methods, multistep methods, Runge-Kutta Methods. 
Advanced methods for Differential Equations [6 Lecture]: Adaptive methods, BVP finite difference 
methods and their extension to PDEs, introduction to parallel computation. 
 
Textbook 
1. S.S. Sastry, (2012) Introductory Methods of Numerical Analysis, PHI Learning. 
2. E. Kreyszig, (2010) Advanced Engineering Mathematics, Wiley. 
3. S.C. Chapra, (2008) Applied Numerical Methods with MATLAB for Engineers and 
Scientists, McGraw-Hill. 
4. Golub, G.H., and Loan, C.F.V., (2000) Matrix Computation, JHU Press. 
Reference Books 
1. R.L. Burden and J.D. Faires, (2011) Numerical Analysis, Cengage Learning. 
2. J.H Mathews and K.D. Fink, (2006) Numerical Methods using Matlab, Pearson 
Education. 
3. R. Süli and D.F. Mayers, (2003) Introduction to Numerical Analysis, Cambridge 
University Press. 
Self-Learning Material 
1. Lal, R. and Banerjee S., Numerical Analysis, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Mathematics, IIT Roorkee,https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107062/ 
2. Usha, R., Numerical Analysis, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mathematics, IIT 
Madras,https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111106101/ 
 
 
 
 
Title Introductory Condensed Matter Physics Number PH2XXX 
452  
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech. Type  
Pre-requisite None 
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Explain the physics of condensed matter from the point of view of interatomic forces, lattice 
dynamics, electronic charge and spin. 
2. Explain the theories governing various physical properties of materials 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to: 
1. understand various physical properties of solids. 
 
Contents 
Condensed Matter: Gases, Liquid, and Solid. 2D and 3D lattice, Miller indices of planes and 
directions, Reciprocal lattice, Brillouin zone, crystal symmetry, Atomic bonding, Condensation 
and Freezing (8 lectures) 
 
Elementary Lattice Dynamics: Cohesion of solids, cohesive energy, Lattice Vibrations and 
Phonons, Acoustical and Optical Phonons. Qualitative Description of the Phonon Spectrum in 
Solids. Einstein and Debye Theories of Specific Heat of Solids. T3 Law. (6 lectures) 
 
Soft Condensed Matter: Colloids, Stokes’ law, Brownian motion and Einstein E quation, Forces 
between colloid particles, Stability of colloids, Polymer solutions and gels, Rubber elasticity  (6 
lectures) 
 
Surfaces and Interfaces: Geometry of interfaces, stacking period and interplanar spacing, 
surface structure, observation and creation of surfaces, low energy electron diffraction, 
reflection high energy electron diffraction, (4 lectures) 
 
Electrical, Thermal, and Optical Properties of Materials:charge carriers and transport, Electrical 
and Thermal Conduction: Drude model, Hall effect, Dielectric Materials: polarization, 
ferroelectrics, piezoelectrics, Optical Properties: Light waves, refractive index, absorption, 
luminescence (8 lectures) 
 
Magnetic Properties of Matter: Dia-, Para-, Ferri- and Ferromagnetic Materials. Classical 
Langevin Theory of dia – and Paramagnetic Domains. Quantum Mechanical Treatment of 
Paramagnetism. B-H Curve. Hysteresis and Energy Loss. (10 lectures) 
 
Text Books: 
1. Kittel, C.., Introduction to Solid State Physics, John Wiley and Sons 2019. 
2. Marder, M. P., Condensed Matter Physics, Cambridge University Press, 2010 
 
Reference Books: 
1. N. W. Ascroft and N. D. Mermin, Solid State Physics, (Harcourt Asia, Singapore, 2003). 
 
Self-Learning Material: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XQk25fSJkL8&list=PLaNkJORnlhZnC6E3z1 - 
i7WERkferhQDzq 
453  
Title Foundations of Quantum Information 
Processing 
Number PH2XXX 
Department Physics/Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type  
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
. To provide basic concepts of quantum information and computation 
. To let student understand the importance of an emerging and interdisciplinary area  
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Ability to analyze the effects of fundamental laws of quantum mechanics to information 
processing and computing 
2. Ability to appreciate the advantages and concerns associated with theoretical as well as 
experimental aspects of quantum information and computation 
 
Course Content 
Mathematical formalism [12 Lecture]: Classical to quantum mechanics, bases and linear 
independence, wave function formalism, Interference, operators and matrices, Hermitian and 
Unitary operators, commuting and non-commuting observables, uncertainty and measurements 
in quantum mechanics, Stern-Gerlach experiment, pure and mixed states, density operators and 
Bloch sphere, Schrodinger’s cat, Einstein -Podolsky-Rosen paradox, qubits, quantum gates and 
quantum circuits 
 
Entanglement and Nonlocality [8 Lectures]: Bi-partite and multipartite states, q uantum 
entanglement, quantum parallelism, Schrödinger's cat and Einstein -Podolsky-Rosen paradox, 
Bell states, Classical versus quantum correlations, Bell inequality and nonlocality, quantum 
steering 
 
Quantum information [6 Lectures]: No-cloning theorem, information and entropy, von-Neumann 
entropy, relative entropy and interpretation, trace distance, fidelity 
 
Quantum Information Processing [8 Lectures]: Dense coding, teleportation, entanglement 
swapping, quantum cryptographic protocols, quantum games 
 
Quantum Noise and operations [6 Lectures]: Quantum operations, Kraus operators and operator- 
sum representation, examples and effects of noisy channels on entanglement, quantum error 
correction 
 
The State of the Art [2 Lectures]: Overview and state of the art, Difficulties and open questions, 
Experiments, Facts versus fiction 
 
Text Books 
Nielsen, M. A. and Chuang, I. L., (2010), Quantum Computation and Quantum Information, 10th 
Anniversary addition, Cambridge University Press 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Griffiths, D. J., (2016), Introduction to Quantum Mechanics, Reprint edition, Pearson Prentice 
Hall, 2006. 
2. Bouwmeester, D., Ekert, A. and Zeilinger, A., (2000), The Physics of Quantum Information, 
Reprint edition, Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 
3. Bellac, M. L., (2006), A Short Introduction to Quantum Information and Quantum Computation, 
Cambridge University Press 
 
Self-Learning Material: 
1. Goswami, D., Quantum Computing, NPTEL course material, Department of Chemistry, IIT Kanpur 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xnmpWfQKPSE&list=PLq- 
Gm0yRYwTj7Fs6jyzYa83HErSrpXgPQ 
2. Preskill, J., Lecture Notes for Quantum Computation, Preskill Lecture Notes, California Institute 
of Technology 
454  
Title Metrology Number PH2XXX 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type  
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
The students will gain 
1. Knowledge to understand the issues related to optical interferometers and its applications to 
various measurement techniques. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Show a basic familiarity with the science and technology of various optical interferometers.  
 
Contents 
 
Introduction to Metrology: Concepts of measurements, Standards and Measurements (3 Lectures)  
 
Optical Interferometry and measurements: Introduction to wave optics, Coherence theory, 
Imaging systems, Spectral and polarization effects on interferometry, Various interferometers: 
Michelson, Mach-Zehnder interferometer, Speckle Interferometer, Sagnac interferometer, 
Shadowgraphy, Schlieren, Shearing interferometers and its applications, Recording and analysis 
of interferogram, Standard of length, Refractive index Measurement and testing of optical  systems 
and components (9 Lectures) 
 
New directions in metrology/ Modern trends in metrology and measurements standards (2 
lectures) 
 
Textbook 
1. Steel, W. H., Interferometry, Cambridge University Press (1967) 
 
Self-Learning Material 
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112106179/, NPTEL course by K. Sadashivappa, Dept. of Mechanical 
Engineering, IIT Madras 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. Malacara-Hernández, D., and Malacara-Hernández, Z., Handbook of Optical Design, 
Third Edition CRC press (2013) 
2. Basics of Interferometry, P. Hariharan, Academic Press (1992) 
455  
Title Statistical Mechanics Number PHL2XXX 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type  
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
The students will gain 
1. Deep understanding of kinetic theory of gases and fundamentals of statistical physics.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Demonstrate a detailed understanding of kinetic theory of transport in gases. 
2. Discuss the behavior of non-interacting ideal systems using statistical physics. 
 
Contents 
 
Kinetic Theory of Gases: Kinetic theory of gases, Maxwell -Boltzmann Distribution of molecular 
velocities, Equipartition theorem, Basic kinetic theory of transport in gases, Molecular collisions, 
Mean free path, Diffusion, van der Waal’s equation of state (9 Lectures) 
 
Statistical Mechanics:Phase space and Liouville’s theorem, Ensembles, Non -interacting ideal 
systems, Partition function for various systems (11 Lectures) 
Quantum statistics: Bose -Einstein and Fermi -Dirac distributions; Fermi Energy, Black body 
radiation (8 Lectures) 
 
Textbook 
1. Statistical Mechanics, Donald A McQuarrie, Viva Books Pvt. Ltd, (2005) 
2. Chandler, D., Introduction to Modern Statistical Mechanics, Oxford University Press,  1987 
 
Self-Learning Material 
1. Statistical Mechanics :https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ckUyxmwaC5E 
2. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/115106111/, NPTEL course by A. Joy, Dept. of Physics, IIT Madras 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. Huang, K., Statistical Mechanics, John Wiley and Sons, 1987 
456  
Title Physics of Complex Fluids Number PHL2XXX 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type  
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
The students will gain 
1. Basic understanding of the physics of simple and complex fluids/liquids. 
2. Advanced knowledge in applying the concepts to industrially relevant practical  applications. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Demonstrate deep understanding of basic concepts related to liquid matter. 
2. Exploit the physics of complex fluids to a wide variety of consumer goods. 
 
Contents 
PHL2XX1 Fundamentals of Fluid Matter (1-0-0): 
States of matter, Simple fluids, Molecular liquids , Intermolecular forces, Model interaction 
potentials, Experimental techniques for liquid structure, Pair correlation functions, Static and 
dynamic structure factor, Introduction to X-ray and Neutron scattering (14 lectures) 
 
PHL2XX2 Theory of Complex Liquids (1-0-0): 
Theory of elasticity and viscosity, Stokes -Einstein relation, Linear response theory, Green -Kubo 
relations, Viscoelasticity, Master equation, Stress -strain behavior, Rouse theory, Kremer -Grest 
model (14 lectures) 
 
PHL2XX3 Advanced Topics in Complex Liquids (1-0-0): 
Supercooled fluids, Glasses, Glass transition temperature, Time correlation function, Breakdown 
of Stokes-Einstein relation, Gels, Polymer melts, Colloidal suspensions, Microemulsions, Rheology 
and Rheometer, Microfluidic devices, Physics of soft material consumer goods & cosmetics (14 
lectures) 
 
Textbook 
1. Hansen, J.-P. and McDonald, I. R., Theory of Simple Liquids: With Applications to Soft Matter, 
4th Edition, Elsevier, 2013. 
2. Chandler, D., Introduction to Modern Statistical Mechanics, 1st Edition, Oxford University Press, 
1987. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
1. Transport Phenomena of Non-Newtonian Fluids, NPTEL course by Prof. Nanda Kishore, IIT 
Guwahati 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/103/103103146/# 
2. Statistical Thermodynamics of Complex Liquids, MIT Open Course Ware Number 22.52J / 8.575J 
/ 10.44J by Prof. Sow-Hsin Chen https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/nuclear-engineering/22-52j- 
statistical-thermodynamics-of-complex-liquids-spring-2004/syllabus/ 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. Macosko, C. W., Rheology: Principles, Measurements, and Applications, Wiley-VCH, 1993. 
2. Chaikin, P. M. and Lubensky, T. C., Principles of Condensed Matter Physics, Cambridge 
University Press, 2004. 
457  
Course Title Introduction to Analytical Mechanics Course No PHL2XXX 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech Type  
Pre-requisite None   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide concepts and problem solving approach related to Newtonian and Lagrangian 
formulation in Mechanics. 
 
Learning Outcomes: 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Solve problems in Newtonian, Lagrangian and Hamilton formalism 
 
Course Contents 
Introduction to Newtonian and Lagrangian mechanics, constraints, D'Alembert's principle, Problems 
solving approach in Newtonian and Lagrangian formalism (12 Lectures) 
 
Central force problem : The equation of motion, the equivalent one -dimensional problem, 
classification of orbits, Virial theorem, Differential equation for the orbit, inverse square law of 
force, scattering in the central force field. (10 Lectures) 
 
Variational Principles and L agrange’s equations : calculus of variations, Hamilton's principle, 
derivation of Lagrange's equation from Hamilton's principle, its application, conservation and 
symmetry property. (8 Lectures) 
 
Rigid body motion: orthogonal transformation, the Eulerian an gles, Euler’s theorem, infinitesimal 
rotation, Rodrigues formula, quaternion, the heavy symmetrical top, Gyroscope, Foucault 
Pendulum ( 8 Lectures) 
 
Hamilton's equation of motion: Legendre transformations and Hamilton's equation (4 Lectures) 
 
Text books: 
1. Simon, Keith. R., Mechanics Second Edition Addison -Wesley publication (1960). 
2. Analytical Mechanics, L. N. Hand and J. D. Finch Paperback (1998) 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Goldstein, H., Classical Mechanics, Pearson India Limited, New Delhi (2011). 
2. Landau, L.D. and Lifshitz, E.M., Mechanics, Pergamon Press, (1960). 
 
Self-Learning Material: 
1. Prof. Harbola. M. K. , Engineering Mechanics, Indian Institute of Technology -Kanpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/115/104/115104094/ 
458  
Title Nanoscience Number CYL2XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type SLE 
Prerequisite None   
Objectives 
The aim of this course is to provide 
1. Strong foundation and basic knowledge of nanoscience. 
2. Greater understanding of the underlying theory of material behaviour at nanoscale. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will enable to: 
1. Appreciate the science involved in the nanoscale phenomena. 
2. Design a strategy for nanoscale synthesis. 
3. Select nanomaterials for specific applications. 
 
Contents 
Fundamentals of Nanoscience [14 Lectures]: Nanoscale processes, nanosystems, 
nanostructures,        important 
nanomaterials (clusters, nanocrystals, nanotubes and nanowires) 
Size-dependent properties [7 Lectures]: Quantum confinement, Band gap, Surface effects in 
nanosystems, Optical, 
mechanical, electronic and magnetic properties along with surface reactivity 
Principles involved in the synthesis of nanomaterials [7 Lectures]: Top-down and bottom-up, 
soft   versus hard 
methods, chemical and physical methods, hybrid methods for synthesis of 
nanomaterials 
Analysis of nanoscale phenomena [7 Lectures]: X-ray and electron diffraction, gas adsorption 
and porosity analysis 
and zeta-potential analysis 
Applications of nanomaterials [7 Lectures]: Bio-nanomaterials, electronic nanomaterials, 
nanomaterials for energy 
and environmental applications 
 
Textbooks 
1. Lindsay, S. (2009), Introduction to Nanoscience, 1st edition, OUP Oxford, 2009 
1. Pradeep,T. (2007) Nano: The Essentials Understanding nanoscience and 
nanotechnology, Tata McGrawHill Publishing Company Limited. 
Reference Books 
1.  Lourtioz, J., Lahmani, M., Dupas-Haeberlin, C. (2015), Nanosciences and 
Nanotechnology, 1st edition, Springer Nature, 2015 
 
Self Learning Material 
1, Anandh Subramaniam, Nanostructures and Nanomaterials: Characterization and 
Properties,   NPTEL Course, 
Material, Department of Materials Science and Engineering, IIT Kanpur, Link 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/118/104/118104008/ 
459  
Course Title Modern Physics Course No PH2XXX 
Department Physics L-T-P-C 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech Type  
Pre-requisite    
Objectives 
This course aims to: 
1. Provide the basic understanding and concepts of modern physics 
2. Deliver comprehensive knowledge of various fundamental effects of modern physics  which 
has revolutionized the technologies in the 21st century. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will develop the ability to understand the fundamental physics behind various  effects 
and phenomena covered in the syllabus. 
 
Course Contents 
Relativity: Special Relativity, Time Dilation, Length Contraction, Lorentz transf ormations, 
Relativistic Mass and Energy, Energy and Momentum, General Relativity. (6 lectures)  
 
Quantum theory of light: EM Waves, Blackbody radiation, Photoelectric effect, X -rays, X -ray 
Diffraction, Compton -Effect, Stern Gerlach experiment, two -level systems, Pair Production, De - 
Broglie Waves, Phase and Group Velocities, Uncertainty Principle. (8 lectures) 
 
Quantum Mechan ics: Wave Equation, Schrodinger’s wave equation (Time -Dependent Form), 
Linearity and Superposition, Expectation Values, Operators, Schrodinger’s wave equation (Steady 
State), Particle in a Box, Finite potential well. (10 lectures) 
 
Statistical Mechanics: Statistical Distribution, Maxwell -Boltzmann Statistics, Quantum Statistics: 
Fermi-Dirac Statistics and Bose-Einstein Statistics. (6 lectures) 
 
Atomic structure: Energy of Hydrogen Atom, Atomic spectra, Orbital Electron Wavelength, Atomic 
Excitation, Einstein’s phenomenological theory, lifetime of a state, Lasers, Introduction to single 
photon interference and to coherence. (12 lectures) 
 
Text Books: 
1. Beiser,A., (2009), Concepts of Modern Physics, McGraw Hill. 
2. Verma, H. C., (2017), Quantum Physics, Surya Publication, India. 
3. Feynman R., Leighton R, and Sands M. (1965), The Feynman Lectures on Physics, Volume III 
(Addison Wesley, MA). 
 
Reference books: 
1. Eisberg, R., and Resnick, R., (1985), Quantum Physics, 2nd edition, John Wiley, New York. 
2. Shankar. R., (1994), Principles of Quantum Mechanics, 2nd edition, Plenum Press, New York. 
3. Griffiths. D. J.,(2005), Introduction To Quantum Mechanics, 2nd edition, Pearson Education 
India. 
 
Self-Learning Material: 
1.  NPTEL Course Material, Prof. V. Balakrishnan, Department of Physics, IIT Madras 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/ 122106034/. 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
1.  Susskind, L., Foundations of Modern Physics, https://www.courses.com/stanford- 
university/foundations-of-modern-physics. 
460  
Title Design and Analysis of 
Experiments 
Number MAL4X00 
Department Mathematics L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Basic Probability & Statistics   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide background in the area of Design and Analysis of Experiments 
2.  Provide sufficient knowledge of how to plan and conduct experiments in the engineering, 
physical and chemical sciences 
3.  Explain different methods to analyze the resulting data so that valid and objective conclusions 
are obtained 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to 
1. Use different design techniques, namely, randomized block designs, Latin squares, factorial 
designs, Taguchi methods and response surface methodology, in different practical scenarios. 
2. Conduct scientific experiments in their own domains. 
3. Use different methodologies in order to analyze the experiment 
 
Contents 
Introduction to Design of Experiments [2 Lectures]: Why Designed Experimentation? Concept of 
Experimental Error, Fundamental Principles of Experimentation. 
Statistical Preliminaries: [2 Lectures]: F- distribution, Theory of random sampling. 
ANOVA [6 Lectur es]: One-Way Analysis of Variance, Analysis of the fixed effects models, Model 
Adequacy checking, Practical interpretation of results, Multiple comparisons tests, Two -Way 
Analysis of Variance. 
Randomized Blocks, Latin squares, and Related Designs [6 lectur es]: Statistical Analysis of the 
RCBD, Model Adequacy Checking, Estimating model parameters and general regression 
significance test, The Latin Square Design, Statistical Analysis of Balanced Incomplete Block 
Designs, Least square estimation of the paramet ers, Recovery of interblock information in the 
BIBD. 
Introduction to Factorial Designs [6 Lectures]: Basic Definitions and Principles, The Advantage of 
Factorials, Two -Factor Factorial Design: Statistical Analysis of the fixed effects model, model 
adequacy checking, Estimating the model parameters, Choice of sample size, The assumption of 
no interaction in a two-factor model; The 2k Factorial Design: the 22 and 23 designs, the general 2k 
designs, A single replicate of 2k design, the addition of centre point to the 2k design. 
Taguchi Methods [5 lectures]: Designing Experiments using Orthogonal Arrays, Multi -Level and 
Dummy-Level Designs, Signal to Noise Ratio Analysis, Dynamic Signal to Noise Ratio 
Analysis.Response Surface Methodology [6 lectures]: Method of  Steepest Ascent, Analysis of 
Second Order Response Surface: Location of the stationary point, Characterising the response 
surface, Ridge systems, Multiple responses; Designs for fitting Response Surfaces: Designs for 
fitting the first and the second order  models, Blocking in response surface designs, Computer 
generated designs. 
Optimality [3 lectures]: Concepts of Design Optimality, Multiple Response Optimization Methods. 
Tutorial Session [6 classes]: Using R/ Python/ SPSS/ other. 
 
Textbooks 
1. Montgomery, D.C., (2001), Design and Analysis of Experiments, Wiley and  Sons 
2.  Toutenburg, H., and Shalabh, (2009), Statistical Analysis of Designed Experiments, 
Springer 
3. Roy, R.K., (2001), Design of Experiments Using the Taguchi Approach, Wiley and  Sons 
 
Reference Books 
1. Casella, G., (2008), Statistical Design, Springer 
461  
 
2. Morris, M.D., (2011), Design of Experiments: An Introduction Based on Linear Models, CRC 
Press 
Online Course Material 
1. Maiti, J., Design and Analysis of Experiments, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Industrial and System Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology 
Kharagpur,https://nptel.ac.in/courses/110105087/# 
462  
Title Embedded Systems and IoT Number EEL2XXX 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–2 [4] 
Offered for B.Tech. ES Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Basic Electrical Engineering   
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide knowledge of embedded processors and IoT architecture. 
2. Provide knowledge of programming of Embedded Processors. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Use IDEs for writing software for embedded processors. 
2. Design embedded systems for different applications including IoTs. 
 
Contents 
Introduction to Embedded Processors [07 Lectures]: 
Concept of Processors; Arduino Platform; [4L] 
Microprocessors and Microcontrollers, Memory Interfacing [3L] 
Architecture of Processors [08 Lectures]: 
Architecture of ARM M0 processors, ISA of 8-bit and 32-bit microcontrollers,[5L] 
Memory mapped peripherals, peripherals like GPIOs, Timers, analog inputs.  [3L] 
Internet of Things [07 Lectures]: 
Sensors and actuators, Architecture of IoT, working principle of IoT devices, Edge, Fog and Cloud 
computing,[4L] 
IBM Watson IoT—Bluemix, Microsoft Azure IoT Suite [3L] 
Communication Protocols and Enabling Technologies for IoT[06 Lectures]: 
FID and Near Field communication, ZigBee, Bluetooth, [4L] 
HTTP, WebSocket, Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP)[2L] 
Platform for IoT Development [10 Lectures]: 
Introduction  to Arm Mbed development  environment, use of Arm Mbed for programming 
Embedded processors, digital I/Os and analog I/Os interface. [5L] 
Networking and communication, control applications, debugging application, use of high level 
language like C for programming embedded processors [5L]: 
Application of IoT in healthcare, infrastructure and industry 4.0 [4 lectures] 
 
Laboratory 
The laboratory has experiments on interfacing with different sensors i.e. temperature, force, 
current and their readout circuits. Experiments on different communication protocols like 
Bluetooth, Zigbee. Experiments on Cloud platforms like Microsoft Azure and other available cloud 
platforms with the institute. Experiments from reading the signal to analyzing acquired data on 
cloud platforms. 
 
Textbook 
1. Perry Xiao., (2018), Designing Embedded Systems and the Internet of Things (IoT) with 
the ARM® Mbed™, John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 
2. Mohit Arora, (2016), Embedded Systems Design, Learning Bytes Publication. 
 
Reference Book 
1. Marilyn Wolf (2012) “Computers as Components: Principles of Embedded Computing System 
Design” Third Edition, Elsevier . 
463  
Title Modelling and Simulation Number ESXX0 
Department Electrical Engineering, Mechanical engineering, Computer 
Science Engineering 
L-T-P [C] 3–0–2[3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Impart the concepts of various mathematical modelling and solution techniques for engineering 
problems 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to: 
1. 
Mathemati 
cal modelling of engineering problems and their solutions using computer simulatio ns 
2. Use 
different simulation tools for solving problems 
 
Contents 
Introduction: Concept ofSystem, Concept of model, Input and output variables, Static and 
Dynamic systems; Review of conservation laws and the governing equation for heat, mass and 
momentum transfer, Introduction to different types (i.e. Analytical, Graphical) of model s. [5 L] 
Deterministic Systems Modelling: Differential equation, Difference equation, Linear and 
nonlinear equations, linearization, [5 L] Transfer function, State-space representation [3L] 
Examples  like Battery  and  fuel  cell  ,  LRC  circuit, Inverting Amplifier, DC Motor Inverted 
pendulum, Mass-spring-damper model [4 L] 
Stochastic Systems Modelling: Review of probability theory, continuous-time stochastic 
differential equations for modelling uncertain system, Random process, Markov-chain [5 L] 
Modelling of Agent-based interconnected systems: Distributed systems and tools to model; 
introduction to basic notions of Graph theory, associated matrices; use of graph theory to model 
distributed agent-based systems. [5L] 
Finite State Machine and Hybrid System: Hybrid system modelling, Examples: Bouncing ball 
systems, Automated Highway System. [3L] Finite state machine; Extended state machines [5 
L] 
Simulation:Introduction to numerical integration technique to solve differe ntial equations; 
Concept of solution, different numerical algorithms to solve algebraic differential equations; [4L] 
different error bounds of solution; selection of numerical algorithm to solve given problem; [3L] 
 
Laboratory class: Laboratory class would involve simulation of the systems modelled in the 
course of the above using Matlab, Ansys, and other simulation software which include solving 
ordinary differential equations, differential -algebraic equations, solving partial differe ntial 
equations, Simulation of continuous and discrete processes with suitable examples from 
engineering problems, The laboratory will also use COMSOL-multi-physics modeling tools. 
 
Textbook 
1. Zeigler B.P. Praehofer. H. and Kim I.G. (2000) "Theory of modeling and simulation", 2 nd 
Edition, Academic press. 
2. Bungartz H., Zimmer, S., Buchholz, M and Pfluger, D. (2014), Modelling and Simulation, 
Springer. 
3. Ogata K. (2009) Modern Control Engineering 5th edition PHI. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Title Professional Ethics I Number  
464  
Department Humanities and Social Sciences L-T-P [C] 0-1-0[1] 
Offered for UG Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Nil   
Objectives 
The course will: 
1. Foster awareness of ethical responsibilities associated with professions 
2. Assist students in identifying, assessing and resolving ethical dilemmas in professional 
contexts 
3. Help students becoming responsible professionals 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the responsibilities linked to professions 
2. Identify normative commitments of technological knowledge and artifacts 
3. Think analytically and critically 
 
Contents 
Professional Ethics: Basic Notions : Thinking Like an Engineer; Moral Conflicts and 
Dilemmas; What Morality Is and What Morality Is Not; Structure of Moral Reasoning; 
Ordinary Morality and Professional Ethics; Tools and Techniques in Ethics; 
Professionalization and Normative Commitments (7 classes) 
Major Moral Problems in Professional Contexts (case study based):Rights, Duties, and 
Violations; Conflicts of Interests; Corruption; Contracts; Obligations in Special 
Relations; Deception and Puffery; Paternalism; Consent and Dissent; Whistleblowing (7 
classes) 
 
Textbook 
1. Callahan, J.C. (1988), Ethical Issues in Professional Life, New York: Oxford University 
Press. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Meijers, A. (2009). Philosophy of Technology and Engineering Sciences, Amsterdam: 
Elsevier. 
2. Fleddermann, C.B. (2012). Engineering Ethics (4th edition). Boston: Prentice Hall. 
 
Online Resources 
1.  Sanders, J., Professional Ethics, Rochester Institute of Technology, 
www.openculture.com/philosophy_free_courses 
2. Illinois Institute of Technology, Center for the Study of Ethics in the Professions, 
ethics.iit.edu/library/ethics-resources-online 
465  
Title Professional Ethics II Number  
Department Humanities and Social Sciences L-T-P [C] 0-1-0[1] 
Offered for UG Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Nil   
Objectives 
The course will: 
1. Foster awareness of ethical responsibilities associated with professions 
2. Assist students in identifying, assessing, and resolving ethical dilemmas in professional 
contexts 
3. Help students becoming responsible professionals 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the responsibilities linked to professions 
2. Identify normative commitments of technological knowledge and artifacts 
3. Think analytically and critically 
 
Contents 
Ethical Issues in Professional Contexts (case study based): Why Should One be Moral; 
Fairness in Discharging Professional Roles; Fair Competition, Hiring Process; Allocation 
of Burdens and Benefits; Risk Assessment; Privacy and Confidentiality; Obligations to 
Vulnerable Populations (9 classes) 
Character, Integrity, and Accountability: Trust, Respect, and Justice as Foundational 
Values; Role of Conscience and Personal Values; Professional Integrity; Laws, Norms, 
and Professional Codes; Social Responsibility; Responsibility to the Environment (5 
classes) 
 
Textbook 
1. Callahan, J.C. (1988), Ethical Issues in Professional Life, New York: Oxford University 
Press. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Meijers, A. (2009). Philosophy of Technology and Engineering Sciences, Amsterdam: 
Elsevier. 
2. Fleddermann, C.B. (2012). Engineering Ethics (4th edition). Boston: Prentice Hall. 
 
Online Resources 
1.  Sanders, J., Professional Ethics, Rochester Institute of Technology, 
www.openculture.com/philosophy_free_courses 
2. Illinois Institute of Technology, Center for the Study of Ethics in the Professions, 
ethics.iit.edu/library/ethics-resources-online 
466  
Title Introduction to Profession Number XX2XX 
Department All L-T-P [C] 0–0–2 [1] 
Offered for B. Tech. Type IE 
Prerequisites    
Objectives 
The Instructor would: 
1. Introduce students to the profession of engineering 
2. Familiarize students with discipline of their engineering programme 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students would be able to: 
1. Appreciate the significance of Engineering in solving real life problems 
2. Ability to appreciate problem specific to discipline of the programme 
 
Contents 
Introduction to Engineering [4 Sessions]: Broad introduction to Engineering in general 
Introduction to Programme [8 Sessions]: Introduction to respective Programme of studies  
The above session may include: 
● Lectures by successful industrialists, alumni and entrepreneurs about their journey. 
● Screening of videos that bring out the strong relation between science / engineering and 
societal needs. 
● Understanding engineering through product dissection and reverse engineering. 
● Hands-on exercises in laboratories including use of breadboard circuits, Lego sets, robot 
kits, balsa bridge engineering kits, fibre optics kits, mobile apps etc. 
● Interesting demonstrations in laboratories. 
● Industry visits 
● Conducting design and innovation contests among students. 
● Solving science / engineering puzzles in the class. 
● Some interesting demonstrations in laboratories 
● Exposure to successful research cases from the Institute/Department and the impact of the 
same. 
● Exposure to successful products / innovations from the Institute/Department which have 
reached people/ industry/ society. 
● Do-it-yourself projects in teams 
● Lectures by faculty, visitors, on some exciting topics. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Title Environmental Science Number CIL4XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P [C] 2-0-0[2] 
467  
Offered for B.Tech. Type  
Pre-requisite    
Objectives 
1. To inculcate basics of environmental science in students 
2. To address issues of environmental health and policies related to it 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. To be able to understand basic environmental phenomena and to assimilate values of 
environmental laws and policies 
2. To effectively understand different aspects of pollution in the environment 
 
Contents 
Introduction [6 Lectures]: Earth, its composition  and  structure,  Orogeny,  Matter,  Energy 
and  life;  Natural  resources  and  issues; Chemistry and the atmosphere; The role 
ofchemistry in environmental studies, 
Ecosystem, Evolution and Population [12 Lectures]: Ecosystem and cycles, Aut-ecology and syn- 
ecology 
components and classification; Food chain, webs and ecological pyramids; Biomes; 
Renewable and non -renewable energy; Energy plantation and bio energy; Examples of 
ecosystems; Evolution and diversity; Population growth, species interactions and its impact 
Pollution and Environmental Health [10 Lectures]: Types of pollution (Water, Soil, Air, Noise, 
Nuclear etc.)and their effects on environment; Toxicology of pollutants and environmental health;  
Solid waste generation, disposal and associated risks; Mechanisms for minimizing the 
effects and risk assessment in soil and water management 
Food, Agriculture and Climate [8 Lectures]: Green revolution; Sustainable agriculture;Food 
production 
and food security; Nutrition and Health;  Irrigation  and  fertilizers;  Climate  changes  
and solutions 
Environmental Policy and Sustainable development [6 Lectures]: Environmental policies in 
India; Implementation; A glance of International laws and policies; Public awareness and social  
responsibility towards clean future 
 
Text Book 
1. Friedland, A., Relyea, R., and Courard-Hauri, D. (2012), Essentials of Environmental 
Science, 1st edition, New York: Freeman and Company, 2012 
Reference Book 
1. Baird, C. et al. (2008), Environmental chemistry, 4th edition, W. H. Freeman and 
Company, New York, 2008 
 
Self-learning Material 
1. C. V. Sastri, Environmental Chemistry, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Chemistry, 
IIT Guwahati, Link https://nptel.ac.in/courses/122106030/ 
 
468  
Title Energy Materials Number MTL2XX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Institute Core 
(IE) 
Prerequisite Not Required   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce various methods of energy storage and conversion 
2. Explain the mechanisms of energy storage and conversions for various processes 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Understand how materials influence the energy storage and conversion process 
 
Contents 
Introduction: [2 lectures] Importance of energy storage, classification of processes for energy 
storage and conversion, basics of electrochemistry, Nernst Equation 
Electrochemical and Photoelectrochemical Energy Storage and Conversion: [5 lectures] 
Electrolytic capacitor, electrochemical cell, supercapacitor, materials for primary and 
rechargeable batteries, fuel cells, artificial photosynthesis - semiconductor based and dye- 
synthesized solar cells 
Hydrogen Harvesting and Storage: [2 lectures] Hydrogen economy, Hydrogen harvesting, 
Hydrogen storage- mechanical, compressed, and liquid hydrogen storage, metal hydrides 
Thermal and Mechanical Energy Conversion: [2 lecture s] Thermoelectric materials, 
piezoresistive materials 
Carbon Materials for Energy: [3 lectures] Carbon nanoparticle/nanotube/graphene/graphene 
oxide, functionalization of carbon materials, carbon nanomaterials for energy conversion 
and storage 
 
Textbook 
1. Lu, K., (2014) Materials in Energy Conversion, Harvesting, and Storage, 3rd Edition, John 
Wiley and Sons 
 
Reference Books 
1. Kumar, A., Das, S.K., (2017), Energy Storage and Conversion: Materials and Devices, 
Narosa Publishing House 
 
Online Course Material 
1. Pal, K., Selection of Nanomaterials for Energy Harvesting and Storage Application, 
Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, IIT 
Roorkee,http://nptel.ac.in/courses/112/107/112107283 
469  
Title Computational Materials Design Number MTL2XX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Institute Core 
(IE) 
Prerequisite -   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Create awareness of the opportunities of traditional and emerging computational methods 
for materials design 
2. Introduce the molecular dynamics simulation for studying materials, and the concept of 
materials intelligence 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to: 
1. Analyze structural and dynamical properties using molecular dynamics simulation 
2. Identify the applications of machine learning for accelerating materials design 
 
Contents 
Computational techniques for Materials design: [3 lectures] Introduction and need for 
computational techniques in materials design, techniques, current and potential applications 
 
Molecular dynamics: [8 lectures] 
Basic concepts and Potential energy functions (3 lectures) 
Integration algorithms (2 lectures) 
Initialization and equilibration (3 lectures) 
 
Materials Intelligence: [3 lectures] Data relevant to Materials Engineering, Material Informatics, 
Machine learnin g to create knowledge from materials data and for accelerated materials 
design 
 
Laboratory Classes 
NA 
 
Text Book 
1. Lee, J., Computational Materials Science: An Introduction, 2nd Edition, CRC Press 2016. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Frenkel, D., Smit, B., Understanding Molecular Simulation: From Algorithms to 
Applications, 2nd Edition, Elsevier 2001. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
1. Ceder, G., and Marzari, N., 3.320 Atomistic Computer Modeling of Materials (SMA 5107). 
Spring 2005. Massachusetts Institute of Technology: MIT OpenCourseWare, 
https://ocw.mit.edu. License: Creative Commons BY-NC-SA 
470  
Title Polymers Number CHL2XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 1-0-0 [1] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Institute Core (IE) 
Prerequisite -   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide basic background to structure and properties of polymeric materials 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the basic classifications and synthesis of polymers 
2. Correlate the structure of polymers with properties 
 
Contents 
Background: [3 lectures] Terminologies, classification of polymers, Amorphous & semi - 
crystalline polymer, biopolymers, Functional group reactivity, classification of 
polymerization reactions 
Structure-Property in Bulk Polymer: [6 lectures] Glass transition, crystal structure, crystallinity 
and melting in polymer, mechanical properties -stress-strain relationship, Electrical 
properties: Dielectric properties, conduction in polymers 
Introduction to Viscoelasticity: [3 lectures] Mechanical models for stress -strain relationships- 
Kelvin model, Maxwell model, Voigt model 
Applications: [2 lectures] Polymer composites, polymers for electronic packaging 
 
Textbook 
1. Young, R.J., and Lovell, P.A. (2011), Introduction to Polymers, 3rd Edition, CRC Press 
 
Reference Books 
1. BillMeyer, F.W., (2007), Textbook of Polymer Science, 3rd Edition, Wiley 
 
Online Course Material 
1. Adhikari, B., Science and Technology of Polymers, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Metallurgical & Materials Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology  Kharagpur, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113105028/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Title Materials Selection Number MTL2XX0 
471  
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 1-0-0 [1] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Institute Core 
(IE) 
Prerequisite -   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide basic background to systematically approach for selection of materials for a wide 
range of products in engineering applications 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Correlate between material properties with component design 
2.  Apply the method of materials selection, material data and knowledge sources for 
computer-aided selection of materials 
 
Contents 
Background: [2 lecture] The need for material selection in design, the evolution of Engineering 
materials 
The Design Process and Materials Data: [2 lectures] Types of design, design tools and materials 
data, processes of obtaining materials data, materials databases 
Engineering Materials and Their Properties: [2 lectures] The classes of engineering materials 
and their structure, material properties: mechanical properties, functional properties  
Material Selection Charts: [4 lectures] Selection criteria for materials, material property Charts, 
deriving property limits and material indices, materials indices which include  shape 
Computer Aided Selection of Materials: [4 lectures] Application of GRANTA Edupack for material 
selection: Case studies based on material properties 
 
Textbook 
1. Ashby, M.F. (2010), Materials Selection in Mechanical Design, 4th Edition, Butterworth- 
Heinemann 
 
Reference Books 
1.  Jones, D.R.H., and Ashby,M.F., (2011), Engineering Materials 1: An Introduction to 
Properties, Application and Design, 4th Edition, Butterworth-Heinemann 
2. Jones, D.R.H., and Ashby,M.F., (2012), Engineering Materials 2: An Introduction to 
Microstructure and Processing, 4th Edition, Butterworth-Heinemann 
 
Online Course Material 
1. Bhattacharya,B., Materials Selection and Design, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Mechanical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur,  
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/112104122/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Title Structure of Materials Number MTL2XX0 
472  
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Institute Core (IE) 
Prerequisite -   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce the concept of crystal structure, atomic planes and directions 
2. Introduce the concept of atomic packing, coordination, and symmetry elements 
3. Introduce imperfections in solids 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the atomic arrangement in crystalline materials 
2. Describe the periodic arrangement of atoms in terms of unit cell parameters 
3. Identify various kinds of defects 
 
Contents 
Introduction: [3 lectures] Classification of materials, crystalline and non-crystalline solids, 
atomic bonding 
Geometrical Crystallography: [3 lectures] Symmetry elements: the operation of rotation, Proper 
and Improper rotation axes, Screw axes, Glide planes 
Crystal Structure: [4 lectures] Crystal Lattice, Unit Cell, Planes and directions in a lattice, Planar 
Atomic Density, packing of atoms and packing fraction, Classification and Coordination of 
voids, Bragg’s Law 
Imperfections in Solids: [3 lectures] Types of imperfections, Poin t defects: vacancies, 
interstitials, line defects, 2-D and 3-defects, Concept of free volume in amorphous solids. 
 
Textbook 
1. Azaroff, L.V., (2001) Introduction to solids, 1st Edition, McGraw Hill Book Company 
 
Reference Books 
1. Callister Jr, W.D., Rethwisch, D.G., (2018), Materials Science and Engineering: An 
Introduction, 10th Edition, Hoboken, NJ: Wiley 
 
Online Course Material 
1. Prasad, R., Introduction to Materials Science and Engineering, NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of  Materials Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi,  
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113102080/ 
2. Subramaniam, A., Structure of Materials, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Material 
Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology 
Kanpur,https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113104014/ 
473  
Title Physical Metallurgy Number MTL2XX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Institute Core (IE) 
Prerequisite -   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce phase stabilities and phase diagrams 
2. Teach mechanism of phase transformations 
3. Introduce various heat treatment methods 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the importance of phase diagrams 
2. Understand the phase transformations 
3. Know various heat treatment methods for controlling the microstructure 
 
Contents 
Alloy Systems: [1 lecture] Classification of Solid solutions, Hume-Rothery Rules 
Phase Diagrams: [4 lectures] Gibbs Phase Rule, Solubility limit, phase equilibria and Phase 
Diagrams: Isomorphous systems, Invariant Binary Reactions, Lever Rule; important phase - 
diagrams 
Diffusion: [2 lectures] Diffusion-Fick’s Laws, Role of imperfections in diffusion 
Nucleation and growth: [1 lecture] Introduction to homogeneous and heterogeneous nucleation, 
critical radius for nucleation 
Plastic Deformation: [2 lectures] Slip, Twinning; Recovery -Recrystallization-Grain Growth, 
Introduction to Strengthening mechanisms 
Heat treatment: [4 lectures] Annealing, normalizing, hardening and tempering; TTT diagram, 
microstructural effects brought about by these processes and their influence on mechanical 
properties 
 
Textbook 
1. Avner, S.H., (2017), Introduction to Physical Metallurgy, 2nd Edition, McGraw Hill 
Education. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Abbaschian, R., Abbaschian, L., Reed-Hill, R. E., (2009), Physical Metallurgy Principles, 4th 
Edition, Cengate Learning. 
 
Online Course Material 
1. Schuh, C., 3.40J Physical Metallurgy. Fall 2009. Massachusetts Institute of Technology: MIT 
Open Course Ware, https://ocw.mit.edu. License: Creative Commons BY-NC-SA. 
2. Ghosh, R.N., Principles of Physical Metallurgy, IIT Kharagpur, 
http://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/113105024/ 
474  
Title Corrosion Number MTL2XX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Institute Core (IE) 
Prerequisite -   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce to different forms of corrosion 
2. Elucidate thermodynamics and kinetics of corrosion 
3. Teach different protection mechanisms against corrosion 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Understand corrosion under different environments 
2. Understand the thermodynamics and kinetics of corrosion 
3. Know protection methods against corrosion 
 
Contents 
Introduction and Motivation: [2 lecture] Economics, forms of corrosion, design, basics of 
Electrochemistry, 
Thermodynamics and Kinetics: [6 lectures] Nernst equation, Pourbaix diagram, Rate 
expression, Exchange current density, Polarization, Tafel Equation, Mixed Potential Theory - 
Galvanization, Passivation, corrosion measurement 
Forms of Corrosion: [5 lectures] Major forms of corrosion (e.g. uniform, galvanic, crevice 
corrosion, stress corrosion, Hydrogen embrittlement, sulphate attack, etc.), Oxidation, 
Pilling Bedworth ratio, corrosion of steel, Al, and concrete, microbial corrosion  
Corrosion Protection: [1 lecture] Cathodic and anodic protection, Inhibitors, coatings 
 
Textbook 
1. Fontana, M.G., (2017) Corrosion Engineering, 3rd Edition, McGraw Hill 
 
Reference Books 
1. Ahmad, Z., (2006), Principles of Corrosion Engineering and Corrosion Control, Elsevier 
2. Revie, W.R., Uhlig, H.H., (2008) Corrosion and Corrosion Control, 4th edition, Wiley 
 
Online Course Material 
1. Natarajan, K.A., Advances in Corrosion Engineering, Department of Materials Engineering, 
IISc Bangalore,http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113108051/ 
2. Mondal, K., Corrosion I, Department of Material Science and Engineering, Indian  Institute 
of Technology, Kanpur,https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113/104/113104082/ 
475  
Title Electronics Materials Number PHL2XXX 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Basic knowledge of Electromagnetism   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce materials used for application in electronics 
2. Demonstrate importance of semiconductor materials in operation of computers 
3. Provide brief description of novel materials designed for future applications 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to: 
1. Understand the role of materials in Electronics and Computer Engineering  applications 
2. Learn the process of Material selection in specific applications 
 
Contents 
 
Fractal1:PHL2XX1 Electronics Materials (1-0-0) 
Classification of Materials [2 Lectures]: Materials fordevices (Electrical, Electronics, Magnetic, 
Optical and 
Mechanical properties); Electronics materials (diodes, transistors, FET (MOSFET, MESFET) and 
IC) 
 
Microprocessor Material [5 Lectures]: Moore’s law, Early development of Transistor and IC, CMOS 
Technology, 
Device scaling, Why silicon (Structural, Electronic, Mechanical, Thermal and Chemical properties), 
III-V and II-VI 
semiconductors for transistors, Advantages and disadvantages over Si, High electron mobility 
transistors (HEMT) 
 
Materials for GATE oxide and interconnects [5 Lectures]: Dielectric constant and GATE oxide, 
Silicon dioxide, Silicon 
Oxynitride, Scaling, Oxide reliability and leakage, High k-Dielectrics, Issues with high k- 
dielectrics, Au, Al, Al alloys 
and Cu interconnects, Silicide and Nitrides 
 
Future electronics materials [2 Lectures]: Carbon nanostructures (nanotubes, graphene), 2D 
materials. 
 
Text Book 
1. Miller, L. S. and Mullin, J.B. (Editors), Electronic Materials from Silicon to Organics,  Springer 
Science 1991 
2. Gupta, K.M. and Gupta, N., Advanced Electrical and Electronics Materials, Scrivener 
Publishing, 2005 
 
Reference Books 
1. Huff, H.R. and Gilmer, D. C. (Editors), High Dielectric constant materials, Springer 2005 
2. Lallert, M. (Editor), Ferroelectrics - Application, Intech Web, 2011 
 
Self-Learning Material 
Swaminathon, P., IIT Madras, Fundamental of Electronics Materials and Devices,NPTEL course 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113106062/ 
476  
Title Magnetic Materials Number PHL2XXX 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Basic knowledge of Electromagnetism   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce materials used for application in magnetism 
2. Demonstrate importance of magnetic materials in operation of computers and electrical 
devices 
3. Provide brief description of novel materials designed for future applications 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to: 
1. Understand the role of materials in Electronics and Computer Engineering  applications 
2. Learn the process of Material selection in specific applications 
 
Contents 
 
Fractal1:PHL2XX2 Magnetic Materials (1-0-0) 
Classification of Magnetic Materials [5 Lectures]: Dia, Para, Ferro-, Antiferro- and Ferrimagnetic 
materials, Hysteresis and Susceptibility, Domains and domain walls, Magnetism in metals, 
semiconductors, amorphous materials, alloys and composites, soft and hard magnets, 
Transformers and Permanent magnets 
 
Materials for Data storage [4 Lectures]: Evolution of Magnetic Data storage, Magnetic Read and 
Write head, Magnetic sensor materials, Giant and Tunnel magnetoresistance, Density of  storage 
and scaling, Superparamagnetism, Future trends in magnetic data storage 
 
Emerging Magnetic and Superconducting materials [5 Lectures]: Spintronics materials and 
application, Magnetic shape memory alloys, Superconductivity, Meissner effect, Type -I and Type- 
II superconductors, Ceramic superconductors, Superconducting magnets, Levitation, 
Superconducting qubits, Josephson junction 
 
Text Book 
 
1. Lacheisserie, E., Gignoux, D. and Schlenker, M., Magnetism Materials and Application Vol  II, 
Springer, 2005 
2. Gupta, K.M. and Gupta, N., Advanced Electrical and Electronics Materials, Scrivener 
Publishing, 2005 
 
Reference Books 
 
1. Coey, J. M. D., Magnetism and Magnetic Materials, Cambridge University Press  2009 
2. Kittel, C., Introduction to Solid State Physics, Wiley 2007 
3. Cullity, B. D., Graham, C. D., Introduction to Magnetic Materials, Wiley 2008 
 
Self-Learning Material 
1. O’Handley, R. MIT Course Number 3.45, Magnetic Materials 
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/materials -science-and-engineering/3 -45-magnetic-materials- 
spring-2004/readings/ 
477  
Title Colloids and Suspensions Number CYL2XX1 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
1. To teach relevant theories and methodological tools in interfacial science 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Understanding the properties and composition of colloids and suspensions 
2. Applications of colloids 
 
Contents 
Introduction to Colloids and surfactants (5 lectures):Classification, properties and stabilities 
of colloids, Brownian 
motion, Osmotic pressure, characterization of colloids; properties and classification 
of  surfactants, micelles, 
Bilayers, liposomes and vesicles, Hydrophilic-lipophilic balance. 
 
Surface and Interfacial Tension (4 lectures):Concepts of surface and interfacial energies and 
tensions; 
measurement-techniques, Stability of equilibrium solutions, Contact angle analysis on 
solid and liquid surfaces, 
free energies of adhesion 
Intermolecular andSurface Forces (5 lectures):van der Waals force between macroscopic 
bodies in electrolyte solutions, 
charged interaction between surfaces , Gouy Chapman Theory, charge Density, forces 
between  two particles, Zeta 
potential 
 
Textbooks 
1. Hunter, R. J., Foundations of Colloid Science, (2001), 2nd Edition, Oxford University 
Press, 2001 
 
Reference Books 
1. Babick, F.,Suspensions of Colloidal Particles and Aggregates, (2016), 2nd edition, Springer 
International Publishing, 2016 
2. Hiemenz, P. C., and Rajagopalan, R., Principles of Colloid and Surface Chemistry, (2016), 
3rd edition., CRC Press, 2016 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Bhaskarwar, A. N., Interfacial Engineering, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Chemical Engineering, 
IIT Delhi, Link https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pAY- 
sfMs2h4&list=PLbMVogVj5nJSDFd- 
zudqQUyhJI0ZNdkC- 
 