Source: http://intra.iitj.ac.in/acad_website/intra//M.Tech.%20CSE%20Curriculum_16102020.pdf
================================================================================

 
 
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PG Course Booklet 
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur 
July 2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur 
 
 
Course Booklet 
 
 
for 
M.Tech. (CSE) 
and 
Dual degree M.Tech. (CSE) + PhD 
 
 
Programs 
 
 
offered by the 
 
 
Department of Computer Science and 
Engineering 
 
 
 
July 2019
 
 
1. Introduction 
Traditionally Computer Science and Engineering (CSE) teaching were focusing on two major areas, i.e., 
theories and systems (database, computer hardware, and operating systems). With the advent of the era of 
Cloud Computing, Edge Computing, AI and Big Data, the discipline is being transformed by incorporation of 
new emerging technologies. It is becoming an instrumental tool in solving major problems faced by modern 
society such as energy, natural disasters, pollution, and water. Through this new ly revamped M.Tech and 
M.Tech-Ph.D dual degree programs in CSE, IIT Jodhpur is making a conscious effort to divulge from the 
traditional path and planning to reposition itself to become a leading institute in this new genre of Computer 
Science education. 
 
2. Objectives 
This M.Tech and M.Tech-Ph.D dual degree programs in CSE will offer students with deep knowledge of core 
and applied computer science. Through this programme, a student will learn niche subject areas which are of 
paramount importance in the modern big data era, such as Computer Systems and Security. This programme 
is aiming at imparting the necessary breadth and depth to the students for pursuing careers in academics as 
well as in industry. This programme is aiming at extending undergraduate compu ting skills with up-to-date 
and in-depth expertise in specialized areas of Computer Systems and Security.  
 
3. Expected Graduate Attributes 
After completing this programme, a student will be able to develop an ability to:  
1. Understand fundamental concepts and hands-on knowledge of emerging fields in Computer Science.  
2. Conceive, Design and Develop state-of-the-art scalable parallel and distributed systems 
3. Solve Big data problems through the knowledge of advanced data structures, distributed algorithmic 
design, analysis, and applications.  
4. Design and develop network protocols for Wireless, Sensor, Mobile, and Vehicular networks.  
5. Ideate, Implement and Integrate cryptographic, fault tolerant algorithms for large scale distributed 
systems  
6. Understand state-of-the-art hardware platforms for running compute intensive distributed algorithms  
7. Ability to understand and apply evolving ethics and privacy laws across various domains and territories.  
8. Plan and manage technical projects 
 
4. Learning Outcome 
 
1. Understand the fundamentals of algorithmic complexity, advanced computer architecture, advanced 
network, and security protocols. 
2. Apply appropriate design principles, framework and protocols to develop dependable systems.  
3. Demonstrate hands-on knowledge of cutting edge simulation, synthesizing, programming tools. 
4. Ability to design and develop system architecture for mobile, cloud, fog, and edge computing.  
5. Demonstrate hands-on knowledge of virtualization, data center design and management, and software 
defined networking. 
6. Skills to comprehend and communicate effectively.  
7. Apply appropriate project and business management principles and tools for real -world problems.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5. Course Structure for the M.Tech. (CSE) Program and Dual Degree M.Tech. (CSE)+Ph.D. Program 
Cat Code Course Title L-T-P Cr  Cat Code Course Title L-T-P Cr 
I Semester  II Semester 
MC MAL7xx0 Statistics I  
Matrix Computation  
Optimization 
1-0-0 
1-0-0 
1-0-0 
3  MC CSL7xx0 Computer Architecture 3-0-0 3 
MC CSL7xx0 Algorithms for Big 
Data 
2-0-0 2  MC CSL7xx0 Software and Data 
Engineering 
3-0-0 3 
MC CSL7xx0 Machine Learning I 3-0-0 3  MC CSL7xx0 Security and its applications 3-0-0 3 
MC CSP7xx0 Data Structures and 
Practices 
0-0-2 1  ME xxxxx Program Elective 3 3-0-0 3 
ME xxxxx Program Elective 1 3-0-0 3  MO xxxxx Open Elective 1 3-0-0 3 
ME xxxxx Program Elective 2 3-0-0 3  NG xxxxx Ethics and Professional Life 1-0-0 1 
NG  Technical 
Communication 
1-0-0 1       
Total Credits: 16  Total Credits: 16 
*Maths Fractals: Linear Algebra, Probability and Random Processes, Optimization 
 
Cat Code Course Title L-T-P Cr  Cat Code Course Title L-T-P Cr 
III Semester  IV Semester 
MP CSD7xx
0 
Major Project – Part 1 0-0-10 5  MP CSD8xx
0 
Major Project – Part 2 0-0-22 11 
ME xxxxx Program Elective 4 3-0-0 3  ME xxxxx Program Elective 6 3-0-0 3 
ME xxxxx Program Elective 5 3-0-0 3  NG xxxxx Intellectual Property 1-0-0 1 
MO xxxxx Open Elective – 2 3-0-0 3       
NG xxxxx System Design 1-0-0 1       
Total Credits: 15  Total Credits: 15 
 
Credit Distribution 
1 Program Core 18 credits 
2 Program Electives 18 credits 
3 Open Electives 6 credits 
4 Project 16 credits 
5 Non-graded  4 credits 
Total 62 credits 
 
  
 
 
 
 
6. Program Electives for M.Tech. (CSE) and Dual Degree M.Tech. (CSE)+Ph.D. Program 
Courses offered by Department of Computer Science and Engineering 
1. Advanced Computer Graphics 
2. AI for Finance 
3. Artificial Intelligence I 
4. Artificial Intelligence II 
5. Bio-image computing 
6. Block chain 
7. Computer Vision 
8. Computational Optimization 
9. Data Visualization 
10. Dependable AI 
11. Digital Image Analysis 
12. Edge and Fog Computing 
13. Embedded Systems 
14. GPU Programming 
15. Graph Theory and Applications 
16. Human Machine Interface 
17. Information Retrieval and Web Mining 
18. Introduction to Augmented Reality and Virtual Reality 
19. Machine Learning II 
20. Machine Learning with Big Data 
21. Natural Language Processing 
22. Neuromorphic Computing and Design 
23. Real time Autonomous Systems 
24. Ad hoc Wireless Networks 
25. Selected Topics in Artificial Intelligence - I 
26. Selected Topics in Artificial Intelligence - II 
27. Selected Topics in Artificial Intelligence - III 
28. Selected Topics in Computer Science - I 
29. Selected Topics in Computer Science - II 
30. Selected Topics in Computer Science - III 
31. Social Network Analysis 
32. Speech processing 
33. Stream Analytics 
34. Vehicular Ad-hoc Networks (VANETs) 
 
Courses offered by Department of Electrical Engineering 
1. Adaptive Signal Processing 
2. Advanced Control System 
3. Advanced Digital Communication 
4. Advanced Signal Processing 
5. Analog and Interfacing Circuits 
6. Antenna Engineering 
7. Applied Optimization for Wireless Communication 
8. Backhaul Networks for Wireless Systems 
9. Coding Theory 
10. Compressive Sensing  
11. Computational Imaging 
12. Cyber Physical System Modelling Laboratory 
 
 
 
13. Data Compression 
14. Digital image and Video Processing Lab 
15. Digital Image Processing and Applications 
16. Digital Signal Processing 
17. Digital Video Processing 
18. Digital VLSI  Design 
19. Embedded System Design 
20. Embedded System Design Lab 
21. Flexible and Printed Electronics 
22. Free Space Optical Communications 
23. GNSS Signal Processing 
24. Image Sensor Design and Applications 
25. Introduction to Cyber-Physical Systems 
26. Machine Learning for Communication 
27. Mathematical Modelling and Simulation 
28. Microfluidics Technology 
29. Microsystems Fabrication Technology 
30. Millimeter Wave Technology 
31. Multi-rate Digital Signal Processing 
32. Nanosensors 
33. Network Information Theory 
34. Neuromorphic computing and design 
35. Optical Fiber Communications 
36. Optimal Filtering 
37. Physical Layer Security 
38. Principles of Data and System Security 
39. Real Time Communications 
40. Resource Constrained AI 
41. RF IC Design 
42. RF IC Design Lab 
43. Selected Topics in Communication I  
44. Selected Topics in Communication I  
45. Selected Topics in Communication II 
46. Selected Topics in Communication III 
47. Selected Topics in Sensors & IoT I 
48. Selected Topics in Sensors & IoT II 
49. Selected Topics in Sensors & IoT III 
50. Selected Topics in Signal Processing I  
51. Selected Topics in Signal Processing II 
52. Selected Topics in Signal Processing III 
53. Sensors and IoT Lab 
54. Sensors and Measurement 
55. Smart Grid 
56. Speech and Audio Signal Processing 
57. Statistical Decision Theory 
58. Systems-on-Chips Design 
59. VLSI Design Lab 
60. Wavelets 
61. Wireless Communication 
62. Wireless Networks 
 
 
 
 
Courses offered by Department of Mechanical Engineering 
1. Robotics 
 
Courses offered by Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering 
1. Bioinformatics 
2. Computational Biology 
 
Courses offered by Department of Mathematics 
1. Financial Engineering 
2. Computational finance 
3. Computational Game Theory 
4. Advanced topics in computational PDE 
5. Dynamical Systems 
6. Stochastic Processes 
7. Representation of Finite Groups 
 
Courses offered by Department of Physics 
1. Quantum Computing 
2. Quantum Information Processing 
3. Quantum Cryptography and Coding 
 
Courses offered by IDRP Digital Humanities 
1. Digital Humanities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Title Algorithms for Big Data Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 
Offered for M.Tech. 1st Year, Ph.D. 1st Year  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite None   
Objectives  
The Instructor will:  
1.  Introduce some algorithmic techniques developed for handling large amounts of data.  
2.  Emphasize on both theoretical as well as practical aspects of such algorithms.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to:  
Analyze existing algorithms as well as design novel algorithms pertaining to big data.  
 
Contents  
Sketching and Streaming: Extremely small-space data structures (4 lectures)  
Numerical linear algebra: Algorithms for big matrices, Regression, Low-rank approximation, Matrix completion 
(8 lectures)  
Compressed Sensing: Sparse signals, Linear measurements, Signal recovery (8 lectures)  
External memory and cache -obliviousness: Minimizing I/O for large datasets, Algorithms and  data structures 
such as B-trees, Buffer trees, Multiway mergesort (8 lectures)  
 
Reference Books  
Markovsky I, (2014), Low Rank Approximation: Algorithms, Implementation, Applications, Springer 
Eldar Y C., Kutyniok G. (2012), Compressed Sensing: Theory and Applications, Cambridge University Press.  
 
Self Learning Material  
Department of Computer Science, Harvard University, Algorithms for Big Data  
  
 
 
 
Title Data structures and practices Number CSP7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 0–0–2 [1] 
Offered for M.Tech. (CSE) 1st Year Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Computer Programming   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
Explain various data structures and provide details to implement and use them in different algorithms  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Write, debug and rectify the programs using different data structures  
2. Expertise in transforming coding skills into algorithm design and implementation 
 
Contents  
Laboratory Experiments  
Exercises based on 
Abstract Data Types: Arrays, link-list/list, hash tables, dictionaries, structures, stack, queues  (4 labs) 
Data Structures: Heap, Sets, Sparse matrix, Binary Search Tree, B-Tree/ B+ Tree, Graph  (4 labs) 
Algorithm implementation: Quick or Merge sort, Breadth or Depth first search or Dijkstra’s Shortest Path First 
algorithm, Dynamic programing (6 labs) 
 
Textbook 
1.Weiss, M. A. (2007), Data Structures and Algorithm Analysis in C++, Addison-Wesley. 
2. Lipschutz, S. (2017), Data Structures with C, McGraw Hill Education.  
3.Cormen, T. H., Leiserson, C. E., Rivest, R. L. and Stein, C., (2009), Introduction to  Algorithms, MIT Press 
 
Online Course Material  
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Delhi, http://www.nptelvideos.in/2012/11/data-
structures-and-algorithms.html 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Title Software and Data Engineering Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.  Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Discuss techniques to manage a large amount of data 
2.  Provide mechanisms to design and develop data-intensive computing systems 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Design complex end-to-end data pipeline for data processing 
2.  Critically identify and use the tools for data handling and management 
3.  Use modern software technologies to design and develop data analytical systems  
 
Contents 
CSL7XX1 Cloud Computing and Virtualization 1-0-0 [1] 
Basics of complex software design: Concept of modular software, microservices, communication, 4+1 
architectural views and patterns (5 lectures) 
Cloud Computing: Architecture of cluster computing, design of data centers, open data center platforms, fault -
tolerant system design (5 lectures) 
Virtualization: Type-1 and Type-2 virtualization, virtual machine, containers, dockers (4 lectures)  
CSL7XX2 Data Management 1-0-0 [1] 
Data Management: Structured data, relational database management, unstructured data, semi -structured 
data,  Nosql database management (mongodb), column database, graph database, XML, JSON, HDFS, 
Handling drift in data, sensor data reliability at software and algorithmic level, sensor data analysis 
techniques (14 lectures)  
CSL7XX3 Data Intensive Processing Systems 1-0-0 [1] 
Data Intensive Processing Systems: Architecture of large scale data processing systems, Hadoop, Apache Spark, 
Storm, parallel data processing concepts such as map-reduce, directed acyclic graph, resilient distributed 
datasets, dynamic resource allocation, partial & shared computation, storage architecture  (14 l ectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Bass L., Clements P., Kazman R., (2012), Software Architecture in Practice , 3 rd edition, Addison-Wesley 
Professional 
2. Martin K., (2017), Designing Data-Intensive Applications: The Big Ideas Behind Reliable, Scalable, and Maintainable 
Systems, 1st Edition, O'Reilly Media 
 
Self Learning Material  
Tylor,R.N., Medvidovic,N. and Dashofy,E.M., (2014), Software Architecture Foundation: Theory and Practice , 
Wiley  
 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 
2. International Conference on Data Engineering  
 
  
 
 
 
Title Computer Architecture Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. 2nd Year Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Computer Organization   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
Provide background to understand various components of a modern computer system, its 
interconnections, and performance issue 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.   Explain the working principles of various components of modern computer systems  
2.   Compare between systems using benchmark data 
3.   Write, execute and debug parallel programs on GPU 
 
Contents 
CSL7XX1 Multi System Architecture 1-0-0 [1] 
Introduction: Defining Computer Architecture, Flynn’s Classification of Computers, Metrics for Performance 
Measurement. (4 lectures) 
Memory Hierarchy: Introduction, Advanced Optimizations of Cache Performance, Memory Technology and 
Optimizations, Virtual Memory and Virtual Machines, The Design of Memory Hierarchies, Introduction to 
Pin Instrumentation and Cache grind, Case Study: Intel Core i7  (10 lectures)  
CSL7XX2 Multicore Processing 1-0-0 [1] 
Instruction-Level Parallelism: Instruction-level Parallelism: Concepts and  
Challenges, Basic Compiler Techniques for Exposing ILP, Reducing Branch Costs with  
Advanced Branch Prediction, Dynamic Scheduling, Superscalar, Limitations of ILP, Case  
Study: Dynamic Scheduling in Intel Core i7. (9 lectures) 
Multicore Processor:  Introduction, CP U Interconnections, Network on Chip (NoC), Routing Protocols, 
Quality of Service on NoC. (5 lectures) 
CSL7XX3 Fundamentals of Parallel Programming  1-0-0 [1] 
Data Level Parallelism: Introduction, Vector Architecture, SIMD Instruction Set Extensions for Mul timedia, 
Graphics Processing Units, GPU Memory Hierarchy, Detecting and Enhancing Loop - Level Parallelism, 
CUDA Programming, Case Study: Nvidia Maxwell. (14 lectures)  
 
Textbook  
1. Hennessy,J.L. and Patterson,D.A., (2012), Computer Architecture: A Quant itative Approach , 5 th Edition, 
Morgan Kauffmann Publishers  
2. Shen,J.P. and Lipasti,M.H., (2005), Modern Processor Design: Fundamentals of Superscalar Processors , 
McGraw-Hill Publishers  
 
Self-Learning Material  
1.  CUDA: https://developer.nvidia.com/cuda-zone 
2.   OpenMP: https://www.openmp.org/ 
     
Preparatory Course Material  
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106106134/ 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Title Machine Learning-1 Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. 1st Year, Ph.D. 1st Year Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite None    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide motivation and understanding of the need and importance of Machine Learning in today’s world  
2.  Provide details about various algorithms in Machine Learning  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Develop a sense of Machine Learning in the modern context, and independently work   on problems relating 
to Machine Learning  
2. Design and program efficient algorithms related to Machine Learning, train models,  conduct experiments, 
and deliver ML-based applications  
 
Contents  
CSL7XX1: Introduction to Machine Learning: Supervised Learning 1-0-0[1] 
Introduction: Motivation, Different types of learning, Linear regression, Logistic regression (2 lectures)  
Gradient Descent: Introduction, Stochastic Gradient Descent, Subgradients, Stochastic Gradient Descent for risk 
minimization (2 lectures)  
Support Vector Machines: Hard SVM, Soft SVM, Optimality conditions, Duality, Kernel trick, Implementing Soft 
SVM with Kernels (4 lectures)  
Decision Trees: Decision Tree algorithms, Random forests (2 lectures)  
Neural Networks: Feedforward neural networks, Expressive power of neural networks, SGD and 
Backpropagation (3 lectures)  
Model selection and validation:  Validation for model selection, k -fold cross -validation, Training -Validation-
Testing split, Regularized loss minimization (1 lectures)  
 
CSL7XX2: Introduction to Machine Learning: Unsupervised Learning and Generative Models 1 -0-0[1] 
Nearest Neighbour: k-nearest neighbour, Curse of dimensionality (1 lecture)  
Clustering: Linkage-based clustering algorithms, k-means algorithm, Spectral clustering (3 lectures)  
Dimensionality reduction: Principal Component Analysis, Random projections, Compressed sensing (2 lectures)  
Generative Models: Maximum likelihood estimator, Naive Bayes, Linear Discriminant Analysis, Latent variables 
and Expectation-maximization algorithm, Bayesian learning (5 lectures)  
Feature Selection and Generation: Feature selection, Feature transformations, Feature learning (3 lectures)  
CSL7XX3: Introduction to Machine Learning: Computational Learning Theory and Deep Learnin g 1-0-0[1] 
Statistical Learning Framework: PAC learning, Agnostic PAC learning, Bias -complexity tradeoff, No free lunch 
theorem, VC dimension, Structural risk minimization, Adaboost (7 lectures)  
Foundations of Deep Learning: DNN, CNN, RNN, Autoencoders (7 lectures)  
 
Textbook 
Shalev-Shwartz,S., Ben -David,S., (2014), Understanding Machine Learning: From Theory to Algorithms , 
Cambridge University Press  
 
Reference Books  
Mitchell Tom (1997). Machine Learning, Tata McGraw-Hill  
 
Self Learning Material  
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University,  
https://see.stanford.edu/Course/CS229  
 
  
 
 
 
Title Security and Its Application Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.  Type Elective   
Prerequisite Networks   
Objectives  
The Instructor will:  
1.  Provide the fundamental principles of access control models and techniques, authentication and secure 
system design 
2.  Introduce a strong understanding of different cryptographic protocols and techniques and be able to use 
them 
3.   Provide methods for authentication, access control, intrusion detection and prevention  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to:  
1.   Understand cryptography and network security concepts and application 
2.   Identify and investigate network security threat 
3.   Analyze and design network security protocols  
 
Contents 
Shannon’s Approach to Cryptography:  Measures of security, Perfect secrecy, Definition of entropy, One -time pad 
(3 lectures) 
Symmetric Key Cryptography: The notion of a symmetric key cryptography, The Data Encryption Standard (DES) 
and differential cryptanalysis, The Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) (4)  
Cryptographic Hash Functions: Definition of hash functions and properties, Unkeyed hash functions, Keyed hash 
functions, Message Authentication Codes (MAC), The Random Oracle Model (ROM) (4 lectures)  
Authentication: Definition of authentication, A simple authentication protocol and possible attacks, Strong 
password protocol s, BM Encrypted Key Exchange (EKE), Key Distribution Centers (KDC), Certification 
authorities and certificate revocation, KDC based authentication protocols (6 lectures)  
Public Key Cryptosystems: Fundamentals of Public-key Cryptography, Background on numbe r theory, The RSA 
public key cryptosystem, The ElGamal public key cryptosystem and discrete logs  
Digital Signatures: An RSA based signature scheme, The ElGamal based signature scheme,The Schnorr signature 
scheme, The Digital Signature Algorithm (DSA) (8 lectures) 
Key Distribution and Key Agreement Protocols:  Key Predistribution: Diffie -Hellman key Exchange, The MTI key 
Exchange (4 lectures) 
Network Security: TCP/IP threats, The IPSEC protocol, The SSL and TLS protocols, Firewalls and Virtual Private 
Networks (VPNs), Electronic mail security, Worms, DDoS attacks, BGB and security considerations (5 lectures)  
Cyber-physical security: IoT security, sensor actuator network security (4 lectures) 
Block Chain:  Introduction to Blockchain, Blockchain Architecture and Design, Consensus, Permissioned 
Blockchains (4 lectures) 
Laboratory Experiments  
Programming exercises using Exata and AVISPA Tools  
 
Textbook  
1.  Stallings, W. (2017). Cryptography and network security, 7/E. Pearson Education India  
2. Douglas R. Stinson, Maura B. Paterson (2018). Cryptography: theory and practice. 4/E Chapman and Hall/CRC  
 
Reference Books  
1.   Mao, W. (2004). Modern cryptography: theory and practice. Pearson Education India 
2.   Pfleeger, C. P., & Pfleeger, S. L. (2018). Security in computing. 5/E, Prentice Hall Professional Technical 
Reference 
3.   Goldreich, O. (2009). Foundations of cryptography: volume 2, basic applications. Cambridge university press 
4.   Forouzan, B. A. (2015). Cryptography & network security. 3/E, McGraw-Hill, Inc.  
 
Self Learning Material  
1.  Network and Computer Security - MIT OpenCourseWare 
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-857-network-and-computer-
security-spring-2014/ 
2.   Cryptography I,  Coursera, Stanford University, https://www.coursera.org/learn/crypto 
 