Source: http://intra.iitj.ac.in/acad_website/pg_curriculum/MATHEMATICS_06092019.pdf
================================================================================

 
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur 
 
   
 
 
 
 
PG Course Booklet 
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur 
July 2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
M.Tech  & M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree  
 in  
Data and Computational Science 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1) Introduction 
Data Science is the art of generating insight, knowledge and predictions by processing of data 
gathered about a system or a process. Computational Science is the art of developing validated 
(simulation) models in order to gain a better understanding of a p henomenon (system’s or 
processes). Computational sciences focus on development of causal models using latent patterns in 
the observed data, rather than only extracting patterns or knowledge from data by statistical 
methods.  
 
(2) Objective of the Programme 
To produce  professionals with deep knowledge and innovative analytical and computational 
research skills to handle problems in a variety of domains including governance, finance, security, 
transportation, healthcare, energy management, agriculture, popul ation studies, weather 
prediction, economics, social sciences, predictive maintenance, structural health monitoring, smart 
manufacturing and computational structural biology. 
 
(3) Expected Graduate Attributes (M.Tech.) 
1. Skill set to clean, process, analyze,  manage and handle security and privacy aspects of 
structured and unstructured data. 
2. Ability to identify, design and apply appropriate pattern recognition and data mining 
methods for generating relevant insight from data. 
3. Knowledge and capability to develo p and apply machine learning techniques for data driven 
modelling. 
4. Ability to develop models and simulation schemes based upon domain knowledge in chosen 
domains and possible combination with data driven models. 
5. Capability to follow uniquely interdisciplinary approach for solving problems, using 
knowledge of mathematics, statistics, computing and one or more selected domains among  
physics, chemistry, biology and engineering sciences. 
6. Skill to use and design appropriate visualization technique s for representation and 
presentation of insights and solutions.  
7. Ability to innovate and contribute towards next generation data driven technology 
development.  
8. High quality technical communication skills. 
9. Appreciation and adherence to norms of professional ethics.  
10. Ability to plan and manage technical projects. 
 
(4) Learning outcome: 
1. Strong Understanding of fundamentals of Data Mining, Machine Learning,  Modelling & 
Simulation, Optimization and Numerical Techniques. 
2. Basic understanding of Cryptographic and Blockchain Techniques. 
3. Knowledge about basics and use of visual analytics. 
4. Skill set to develop applications using Big Data.  
5. Advanced analytical and data driven modelling and simulation skills to address technological 
challenges in one or more specializ ed knowledge  domains like physics, chemistry, biology 
and engineering sciences. 
6. Demonstrate skills to communicate scientific ideas and/or application systems.  
7. Acquire project management skills. 
 
 
 
 
(5) Program Structure: 
Cat. Course 
Number 
Course Title L-T-P Credits Cat. Course 
Number 
Course Title L-T-P Credits 
Semester 1 Semester 2 
C MAL7XX0 Introduction to 
Data Science 
1-0-0-0 1 C MAL7XX0 Numerical 
Methods for PDE 
1-0-0-0 1 
C CSL7XX0 Machine 
Learning 1 
3-0-0-0 3 C CSL8XX0 Machine Learning 
2 
3-0-0-0 3 
C MAL7XX0 Mathematics for 
Data Science 
3-0-0-0 3 C CSL7XX2 Software and 
Data 
Architecture* 
1-0-0-0 1 
C MAL7XX0 Statistics 2 2-0-0-0 2 C CSL7XX0 Security and its 
Application 
3-0-0-0 3 
C MAL7XX0 Introduction to 
Modeling 
1-0-0-0 1 C MAP7XX0 Data Analytics 
Lab 
0-0-2-0 1 
E xxxxx PE1 3-0-0-0 3 E Xxxxx PE2 3-0-0-0 3 
C CSP7XX0 Data structures 
and practices 
0-0-2-0 1 E Xxxxx PE3 3-0-0-0 3 
NG xxxxx Technical 
Communication  
1-0-0-0 1 NG xxxxx Innovation andIP 
Management  
 
1-0-0-0 1 
Total 15 Total 16 
Semester 3 Semester 4 
E xxxxx PE4 3-0-0-0 3 E Xxxxx OE2 3-0-0-0 3 
E xxxxx PE5 3-0-0-0 3      
E xxxxx OE1 3-0-0-0 3      
P MA6xx   Project 0-0-0-5 5 P MA6xx   Project 0-0-0-
11 
11 
NG xxxxx System 
Engineering and 
Project 
Management 
1-0-0-0 1 NG xxxxx Professional Ethics 
 
1-0-0-
0 
1 
Total 15 Total 15 
Grand Total 61 
*A fractal from the course. 
 
 Credit Distribution 
S.No. Category Course  
Category Title 
Total 
Courses 
Total 
Credits 
1 C Compulsory  9 18 
2 C Labs 2 02 
3 PE Program Electives 5 15 
4 OE Open Electives 2 6 
5 P Project 1 16 
Total (without non-graded courses)  57 
 
  
(6) Topic Cloud 
Compulsory Topics: 
(a) Data pre -processing (including redundancy removal), Data storage, data 
representation, data handling, data query, data cleaning. 
(b) Relational data bases, graph databases, NoSQL (columnar DB), unstructured data, 
Map reduced techniques and Indexing. 
(c) Distributions, test of hypothesis, stochastic process, queuing process, sampling 
techniques, Probabilistic models, Mixture models, Latent Models, pre diction models, 
Association Analysis, Correlation analysis, Evaluation and Validation, performance 
analysis/metrics 
(d) Vector and matrix algebra, Decompositions, SVD, pseudo inverse, rank approximation  
(e) Linear and Non-linear Programming. 
(f) Classification, regres sion, prediction, clustering, anomaly detection, feature 
engineering, supervised/ unsupervised Learning, Fundamental of SVM, Kernel 
techniques, States space machine, Markov decision process, ANN, Deep learning and 
its implementation, Deep learning applicat ion lab (GPU environment, Python 
environment) , Higher level Machine learning, Transfer learning, online and 
incremental learning, reinforcement learning, explain -ability in Machine Learning, Bias 
variance trade-off, ensemble learning, Auto ML 
(g) Discrete models, continuous models, Hybrid models (both analytical and data driven 
models), assumptions, approximations, models validation, MCS 
(h) Numerical methods for PDEs 
(i) Cryptosystems (types) 
 
Elective Topics: 
Financial engineering, Computational finance, Computational Game Theory, Graph Theory, 
Dynamical Systems, Reliability Theory, Stochastic Processes, Representation of Finite Groups, 
Computational linguistics, Computational economics, Digital Humanities, Cultural informatics, 
Blockchain, security and pr ivacy, AR/VR, Natural Language Processing and Text analytics, 
Visualization, Machine learning for big data, Human -machine interface, Computational 
modelling in materials design, Bioinformatics, Computational biology, Digital Image Analysis, 
Coding Theory, Robotics, Computational electro magnetism, Computational optics, Quantum 
Information System, Quantum Cryptography, Quantum Computing, Computational Physics, 
Computational material science, Computational chemistry, adaptive numerical methods, 
multi-grid methods, parallel methods, GPU computation. 
 
  
 
(7) List of Program Electives 
(a) Electives from sister Departments: 
S.No. Course Title S.No. Course Title 
Department of Mathematics Department of Electrical Engineering 
1 Financial Engineering 19 Digital Image Processing and 
Applications 
2 Computational Game Theory 20 Digital Video Processing 
3 Advanced topics in computational PDE 21 Coding Theory 
22 Compressive Sensing 
4 Dynamical Systems 23 Machine Learning for Communication 
5 Reliability Theory 24 Compressive Sensing 
6 Stochastic Processes 25 Data Compression 
7 Representation of Finite Groups Department of Mechanical Engineering 
8 Shared Computational Economics 26 Robotics 
Department of Humanities and Social 
Sciences 
27 Probabilistic Methods in Engineering 
Department of Physics 
9 Cultural informatics 28 Computational Physics 
Department of Computer Science and 
Engineering 
29 Computational material science 
Department of Chemistry 
10 Computational linguistics 30 Computational Chemistry 
11 Introduction to Virtual and Augmented 
Reality 
Department of Metallurgical and Materials 
Engineering 
12 Natural Language Processing 31 Computational Materials Engineering 
13 Visualization/Data Visualization Department of Biosciences and 
bioengineering 14 Artificial Intelligence 1 
15 Artificial Intelligence 2 32 Omics Technologies 
16 Human Machine Interface 33 Algorithm development 
17 Graph Theory and its Applications 34 Computational modeling in material 
design 17 Bio-image Computing 
18 Computer Vision 35 Applications in Multi Omics data, 
Imaging, Sensors 
 
(b) Electives from IDRPs: 
Digital Humanities 
1 Introduction to Digital Humanities 
Quantum Computing 
2 Introduction to Quantum Information 
3 Quantum Computing 
4 Facets of Quantum Information 
5 Quantum Cryptography and Coding 
 
(c) Specialized electives: 
1 Selected Topics in Data and Computational Science - I (1-0-0-0) 
2 Selected Topics in Data and Computational Science - II (2-0-0-0) 
3 Selected Topics in Data and Computational Science - III (3-0-0-0) 
 
  
(8) Content of compulsory courses: 
 
Title Introduction of Data Science Number MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 1–0–0-0 [1] 
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS) Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will:  
1. Introduce the basics of data science and its underlying concepts.  
2. Introduce data processing, manipulation and cleaning techniques. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Acquire familiarity with the basic concepts of data science. 
2. Distinguish between different kinds of data and data governance. 
3. Understand the preparation and processing of the data. 
 
Contents  
[14 Lectures]  Data preparation, Data pre -processing, Data Cleaning, Data Integration, Data 
Transformation, Data Reduction, Redundancy Removal, Data storage, Data Handling, Querying 
Data, Data Representation and Exploration, Big Data. 
 
Text Books  
1. Kotu, V. and Deshpande , B. (2018) Data Science: Concepts and Practice, Morgan 
Kaufmann. 
2. Saltz, J.S. and Stanton, J.M. (2017) An Introduction to Data Science, SAGE Publications.  
3. Kelleher, J.D., and Tierney, B. (2018) Data Science, MIT Press. 
 
Reference Books  
1. Moreira, J., Carvalho, A. and Horvath, T. (2018) A General Introduction to Data Analytics, 
John Wiley & Sons. 
2. Mayer-Schonberger, V. and Cukier, K., (2013) Big data: The essential guide to work, life 
and learning in the age of insight, John Murray Publications. 
 
Online course Material  
Not Available 
 
 
 
  
 
Title Mathematics for Data Science Number MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 1–0–0-0 [1] 
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS) Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will:  
1. Provide an understanding statistical concepts for data scientist. 
2. Train the student to do Matrix Computations for implementing various numerical 
linear algebra algorithms. 
3. Train student in the domain of linear and non-linear programming. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Derive distributional results needed for the statistical hypothesis testing and perform 
the hypothesis testing for the parameters of the normal population. 
2. Understand the numerical linear algebraic methods and their usage for data analysis. 
3. Apply programming concepts for further applications in different areas of interest. 
 
Contents:  
MAL7XX1: Statistical Techniques [1-0-0-0] 
Probability Models and Sampling  Techniques [3 Lectures]:  Normal, Chi -Square and t 
distributions, Basic concepts of random sampling, sampling from normal distribution, 
properties of sample mean and sample variance. 
Tests of Hypotheses[5 Lectures]: Basic concepts of statistical hypotheses testing -simple and 
composite hypotheses, critical regions, Type -I and Type-II errors, size and power of a test, 
Neyman Pearson lemma, tests for one -sample and two -sample problems from normal 
populations. 
Stochastic Processes [6 Lectures]:  Definition and classification of general s tochastic 
processes; Markov Chains: definition, transition probability matrices, classification of states, 
limiting properties; Poisson process, Birth and death processes, exponential queuing model.  
 
MAL7XX2: Matrix Computations [1-0-0-0] 
Matrix Algebra [3 Lectures]:Matrix operations and type of matrices, Rank of Matrix,  
Eigenvalues, Eigenvectors and Diagonalizable matrices, Vector Norms, Matrix Norms. 
Decompositions [9 Lectures]: Spectral decomposition, Schur Decomposition, QR 
Factorization, Singular value decomposition (SVD), Polar Decomposition, Pseudo Inverse. 
Approximations [2 Lectures]: Least square approximations, Low-Rank Approximation. 
 
MAL7XX3: Optimization [1-0-0-0] 
Linear Programming Problem [4 Lectures] : Linear combination of vectors, Convex set,  
Convex hull, Linear programming problem, feasible solution, basic feasible solution, 
graphical solution, Simplex method, Charne’s M method. 
Duality and IPP[6 Lectures]: Dual of an LPP, Integer Programming, Gomory’s cut -constraint 
method.  
Nonlinear Progra mming[4 Lectures] : First and second order conditions, Constrained 
optimization - Lagrange Multipliers, Karush-Kuhn-Tucker conditions. 
 
Text Books  
     (Fractal 1) 
1. Casella, G. and Berger, R. (2002), Statistical Inference, Cengage Learning. 
2. Ross, S.M. (1996), Stochastic Processes, Wiley. 
 
     (Fractal 2) 
3. Mayer, C.D. (2000) Matrix Analysis and Applied Linear Algebra, SIAM. 
4. Strang, G., (2006), Linear Algebra and its Applications. 
5. Elden, L. (2007) Matrix Methods in Data Mining and Pattern Recognition, SIAM. 
 
     (Fractal 3) 
6. Luenberger, D. G., Linear and Nonlinear Programming , Yinyu Ye, Third  Edition, 
Springer, 2008 
7. Kambo, N. S., Mathematical Programming Techniques,  Second Edition, Affiliated East 
West Press, 2005 
 
Reference Books  
     (Fractal 1) 
1. Rohatgi, V.K. and Saleh, A.K.M.E. (2018). An Introduction to Probability and 
Statistics, Wiley.  
2. Ross, S.M. (2010). An Introduction to Probability Models, Elsevier. 
3. Hoel, P.G., Port, S.C. and Stone, C.J. (1972). Introduction to Stochastic Processes, 
Houghton Mifflin Company. 
 
(Fractal 2) 
4. M    Goloub, G.H. and Charles, F.V.L. (2013) Matrix Computations, JHU Press. 
5. Lancaster, P. and Tismenetsky, M. (1985) The Theory of Matrices: With Applications, 
Academic Press. 
 
(Fractal 3) 
6. Bazaraa, M. S., Sherali, H.D., and Shetty, C. M., Nonlinear Programming: Theory and 
Algorithms, Third Edition, Wiley publications, 2006 
7. Darst, R, Introduction to Linear Programming: Applications and Extensions , Dekker 
Publications, 1991 
 
 
Online course Material  
(Fractal 2) 
1. Agrawal, P.N., Numerical Linear Algebra, NPTEL course material,  Department of 
Mathematics, Indian Institute of Technology 
Roorkee,https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107106/ 
(Fractal 3) 
2. Goswami A., Chakraborty D., Optimization, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Mathematics, Indian Institute of Technology Kharaggpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111105039/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Title Advanced Statistical Techniques Number MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 2–0–0-0 [2] 
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS) Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will:  
1. Provide an understanding of the statistical concepts and their real-life applications. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Estimate the parameters of the underlying population; 
2. Gain the basic knowledge of mixture models, latent models, association, correlation and 
regression analysis. 
 
Contents: 
 
Estimation [ 4 Lectures]:  Point estimation -maximum likelihood estimator, methods of evaluating 
estimators; Interval estimation- Methods of finding confidence intervals. 
 
Mixture Models and Latent Models [3 Lectures]: Basic ideas, finite mixture s, continuous mixtures, 
conditional mixing distributions; Latent models. 
 
Association and Correlation Analysis [7 lectures]:  Categorical data, consistency of data, 
independence and association of attributes; Measures of association – Pearson’s and Yule’s 
measures, Goodman -Kruskal’s γ, Odds Ratio; Fitting of logit model through least squares, 
Properties of product moment correlation coefficient, Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient.  
 
Regression Analysis [14 lectures]:Model building, data collection, uses of regression; Simple linear 
regression model - Least-Squares estimation of the parameters, hypothesis testing on the slop and 
the intercept, interval estimation, prediction of new observations, coefficient of determination; 
Multiple linear regression mode l - estimation of the model parameters, hypothesis testing, 
confidence intervals, prediction of new observations; Model adequacy checking -residual analysis; 
Validation techniques. 
 
 
Text Books  
1. Casella, G. and Berger, R. (2002). Statistical Inference, Cengage Learning. 
2. Marshall, A.W. and Olkin, I. (2007). Life Distributions: Structure of Nonparametric, 
Semiparametric and Parametric families, Springer. 
3. Gun, A.M., Gupta, M.K. and Dasgupta, B. (1998): Fundamentals of Statistics (V -1), World 
Press. 
4. Montgomery, D.C., Peck, E.A. and Vining, G.G. (2012). Introduction to Linear Regression 
Analysis, Wiley. 
 
Reference Books  
1. Rohatgi, V.K. and Saleh, A.K.M.E. (2018). An Introduction to Probability and Statistics, 
Wiley. 
2. Draper, N.R. and Smith, H. (1998). Applied Regression Analysis, Wiley. 
3. Ross, S. (2012). Simulation, Academic Press 
 
Online course Material  
1. Panchenko, D., Statistics for Applications, Massachusetts Institute of Technology: MIT Open 
Courseware, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/mathematics/18 -443-statistics-for-applications-
fall-2006/#. 
 
 
  
 
Title Introduction to Modeling  Number MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 [1] 
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS) Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce various modeling techniques 
2. Explain how to analyses mathematical models 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Model a given scenario using appropriate mathematical techniques 
2. Analyze and draw conclusions about the process/system under consideration 
 
Contents  
 
Principles of mathematical modeling [4 lectures]: Assumptions, approximations, abstraction, scale, 
conservation and balance principles, dimensional homogeneity and consistency, model validation  
 
Modeling Methods [10 lectures]: Continuous models, discrete models, models of hybrid systems, 
use of differential equations, variational principles, Data driven models. 
 
Textbooks  
1. Gershenfeld, N. (1999) The Nature of mathematical modelling, Cambridge University Press.  
2. Haberman, R. (1998) Mathematical models, SIAM. 
 
Reference Books  
1. Dym, C.L. (2004) Principles of mathematical modeling, Academic Press. 
2. Boccara, N. (2010) Modeling complex systems, Springer. 
  
Online Course Material  
Not available 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Title Numerical Methods for PDE Number MAL8XX1 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 1–0–0-0 [1] 
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS)/Ph.D.(MA) Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will  
1. Introduce finite difference schemes for numerical solutions of partial differential equations. 
2. Carry out numerical analysis of various finite difference schemes.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply finite difference schemes for numerical solution of partial differential equations. 
2. Undertake out error analysis and stability analysis of finite difference schemes 
 
 
Contents  
[8 Lectures]  Characterization of PDEs, Finite difference methods for elliptic, parabolic and 
hyperbolic problems. 
 
[6 Lectures] Stability, consistency and convergence theory, dissipation and dispersion, error 
estimates. 
 
Text books  
1. Quarteroni, A. and Valli, A. , Numerical Approximation of Partial Differential Equations, 
Springer, 1997 
2. Morton, K. W.  and Mayers, D. F. , Numerical solution of partial differential equations, CUP, 
2005 
 
Reference Books  
1. Thomas, J. W. , Numerical partial differential equations: Finite difference methods, Springer, 
1995 
2. Trefethen, L. N. and David Bau III, Numerical Linear Algebra, SIAM, 1997 
 
Online Course Material  
1. Nayak, A. K. , Numerical methods: Finite Difference Approach, NPTEL  Course Material, 
Department of Mathematics, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107107/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Title Data Analytics Lab Number MAP7XX0 
Department Mathematical L-T-P-D [C] 0–0–2-D [1] 
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS) Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will  
1. Introduce the basics of R software and then train to write scripts, create a work 
environment, and data handling and data visualization.  
2. Enable students to be able to analyse the data using R. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand R language fundamentals and basic syntax. 
2. Comprehend What R is and how it’s used to perform data analysis. 
3. Create their own R code for visualizations of data. 
 
Contents  
Basic calculations with R, Descriptive statistics [3 Labs]: Introduction to R Software, Basics  and 
calculations with Data Vectors, Built -in-commands and Missing Data Handling, Operations with 
Matrices,  Variables and Types of Data,  Absolute, relative frequency and frequency distribution, 
Graphs and plots. 
 
Central tendency of data and Variation in data [4 Labs]:Arithmetic Mean, Median, Quantiles, Mode, 
Geometric Mean and Harmonic Mean, Range, Interquartile Range and Quartile Deviation, Absolute 
Deviation and Absolute Mean Deviation, Mean Squared Error, Variance a nd Standard Deviation, 
Coefficient of Variation and Boxplots. 
 
Moments, Association of Variables, Fitting of Linear Models [7 Labs]: Central Moments, Absolute 
Moments and Computation of Moments, Skewness and Kurtosis, Univariate and Bivariate Scatter 
Plots, Quantile in 3D plots, Correlation Coefficient, Rank Correlation Coefficient, Measure of 
Association for Discrete and Counting Variables, Least Squares Method. 
 
Text Books  
1. Wickham, H. and Grolemund, G. (2016) R for Data Science: Import, Tidy, Transform, 
Visualize, and Model Data, 'O'Reilly Media, Inc. 
2. Toomey, D. (2014) R for Data Science, Packt Publishing Ltd. 
3. Healy, K. (2018) Data Visualization: A Practical Introduction, Princeton University Press.  
 
Reference Books  
1. Knell, R.J. (2014) Introductory R: A Beginner’s Guide to Data Visualisation,  
2. Stinerock, R. (2018) Statistics with R: A Beginner's Guide, SAGE publication. 
 
Online Course Material  
1. Shalab, Descriptive Statistics with R Software, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Mathematics and Statistics, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111104120/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(9) Content of Elective courses: 
 
Course Title Dynamical Systems Course No. MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA) Type Elective 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
1. To introduce the concept of linear and nonlinear dynamical systems. 
2. To learn the basic concepts in dynamical systems, like, evolution of system, fixed points, 
periodic points, attractors, bifurcation process and stability of the systems. 
3. To understand the nonlinearity in nature and study of the nonlinear models in engineering 
and its dynamics. 
4. Use Matlab and simulink for solving dissipative dynamical systems, which are relevant for 
engineering models.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Construction of phase portraits of nonlinear system and understanding of fundamental 
difference between linear and nonlinear systems. 
2. Identification of attractors, like, fixed points, periodic attractors, Cantor sets, Chaotic attrac tor 
and in the continuous case, limits cycles.  
3. Understanding the different bifurcations, like, saddle node, period doubling etc. 
 
Contents  
Linear and Nonlinear Dynamical Systems [Lectures 12]: History of Dynamics, The importance of 
being Nonlinear, A Dynamical view of the world, Examples of dynamical systems, Uncoupled 
Linear systems, Diagonalization, Exponential of operators, Linear systems in R^2 and Stability 
theory, Nonhomogeneous Linear systems, Nonlinear differential equations, Vector field of 
nonlinear systems, Phase portrait, Limit cycles and their stability. 
 
One-dimensional Discrete maps [Lectures 12]: Logistic maps, period doubling bifurcations, Flip 
and tangent bifurcations, Periodic windows, Intermittency transcritical, Lyapunov exponent, 
Universality and Experiments. 
 
Dynamics of Continuous and Discrete Systems: [Lectures 18] : Lorenz equations, Rossler 
Equation, Chua's circuit, Forced pendulum, Stable and Unstable manifolds, Basin boundary, 
Horseshoe maps, Boundary crisis, Interior crisis, Statistics of Chaotic attractor, Frequency 
spectra of orbits, Matrix times circle. 
 
Textbook 
1. Steaven, S., Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos: With Applications to Physics, Biology, 
Chemistry, and Engineering, 1st Ed., Levant Books, 2007 
2. Alligood, K., Sauer, T., and Yorke, J., Chaos:  An Introduction to Dynamical Systems , 
Second Edition, Springer, 2008. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Devaney, R.L., An Introduction to Chaotic Dynamical Systems, Addison Wesley, 2005. 
2. Holmgren, A.R., A First course in discrete dynamical systems, Springer. 
 
Online course Material  
1. Banerjee S., NPTEL Course on Chaos, Fractals and Dynamic Systems, Department of 
Electrical Engineering, IIT Kharagpurhttps://nptel.ac.in/courses/108105054/ 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Title Stochastic Processes Number MAL8XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA) Type Elective  
Prerequisite Probability and Linear Algebra   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide background in the area of Random Processes. 
2. Provide sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by students for further 
applications in their respective domains of interest. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Develop basic understanding of the Stochastic Process, Random Walk and Martingales. 
2.  Impart knowledge in Markov Chain, Birth and Death Process, Brownian Motion, Stochastic 
Calculus 
 
Contents  
[4 Lectures]  Conditional probability and conditional expectation, properti es of conditional 
expectation. 
 
[8 Lectures] Stochastic processes, stationarity, finite -dimensional distributions, stopping times, 
stopped sigma -fields and processes, right -continuous and canonical filtrations, adapted and 
previsible processes. 
 
[8 Lectures ]Random walk; Gaussian distribution: for variables, vectors and processes, non -
degeneracy, stationarity, closeness under 2-mean convergence. 
 
[12 Lectures] Brownian motion, Gaussian construction, independence of increments, scaling and 
time inversion, Levy' s martingale characterization, reflection principle, law of its maximum in an 
interval and first hitting time of positive levels, modulus of continuity, quadratic and total variation. 
Related processes: Geometric Brownian motion, Brownian bridge, Ornstein -Uhlenbeck process and 
martingales. 
 
[10 Lectures]Poisson distribution, approximation, rate, construction, independence of increments, 
memoryless property of the Exponential law, the dual process of independent Exponential inter -
arrivals, the order statistics of independent uniform samples. 
 
Textbook  
1. Ross, S. M. (2018), Stochastic Processes, Wiley 
 
Reference Books  
1. Ross, S. M. (2005), Introduction to Probability Models, Elsevier 
2. Shreve, S. E. (2008), Stochastic Calculus for Finance II, Springer 
 
Online course Material  
1. Wu, H., Introduction to Stochastic Processes, Massachusetts Institute of Technology: MIT 
Open Courseware, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/mathematics/18-445-introduction-to-
stochastic-processes-spring-2015/. 
 
 
 
  
 
Title Computational Game Theory Number MAL8XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA) Type Elective 
Prerequisite Basics of Optimization Theory   
 
Objectives  
1. Provide background in the area of computational game theory. 
2. Provide  sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by students for further 
applications in their respective domains of interest. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Understanding of fundamentals like Nash equilibrium, dominant strategies and their 
applications.  
2. Basic understanding of the Co-operative games, iterated games and mixed strategies. 
3. Knowledge of non-co-operative games, Zermelo’s algorithm and their applications.  
 
Contents  
[12 lectures]:  Von Neumann and Morgenstern utility functions, expected utili ty and expected 
utility maximization, Paradoxes of expected utility maximization, Compact representations for 
preference relations, Dichotomous preferences and goals. Representations for specifying goals,  
Strategic Form Non -Cooperative Games, Basic model and solution concepts, pure strategy Nash 
equilibrium, dominant strategies, notable games, coordination games and focal points, complexity 
of pure strategy Nash equilibrium. 
 
[14 Lectures]: Mixed strategies: Nash’s theorem and Nash equilibrium, Computing m ixed strategy 
Nash equilibria, Lemke -Howson algorithm, Zero sum games, Minimax Theorem, Compact 
representations for strategic form games, Boolean games, congestion games, Iterated Games: 
Finitely repeated games and backward induction, Infinitely repeated g ames, measuring utility over 
infinite plays modelling strategies as finite state machines with output (Moore machines); The Folk 
theorems, Iterated Boolean games, Axelrod’s tournament, the Hawk -Dove game, evolutionary 
game theory, evolutionarily stable strategies. 
 
[16 lectures]:  Extensive Form Non -Cooperative Games: Zermelo’s algorithm and backward 
induction, subgame perfect equilibrium, Zermelo’s theorem, Compact representations for 
extensive form games, PEEK games and EXPTIME -completeness results, the Ga me Description 
Language (GDL), Imperfect information games, PEEK games with incomplete information, 
Cooperative Games: Transferable utility (TU) characteristic function games, basic model, stability 
& fairness solution concepts, cost of stability, Shapley value, Banzhaf index, induced subgraph 
representation, marginal contribution nets, Simple TU games, swap and trade robustness, 
weighted voting games, vector weighted voting games, network flow games, NTU games and their 
representations  
 
Textbooks 
1. G. Ch alkiadakis, E. Elkind, and M Wooldridge, Computational Aspects of Cooperative Game 
Theory, Morgan-Claypool, 2011.  
2.  Machler, E. Solan, S. Zamir, Game Theory, Cambridge U.P., 2013.   
3. M. J. Osborne, An Introduction to Game Theory, Oxford U.P., 2004. 
 
Reference Books  
1. R. D. Luce and H. Raiffa, Games and Decisions, Wiley, 1958  
2.  M. J. Osborne and A. Rubinstein, A Course in Game Theory, 1994. 
 
Online course Material  
Not Available 
 
  
 
Title Advanced topics in Computational PDE Number MAL8XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA) Type Elective  
Prerequisite ODEs, PDEs and numerical methods   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce multi-grid methods, 
2. Introduce parallel computing methods, 
3. Explain use multi-grid methods and parallel computing methods. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability  
1. to solve partial differential equation using multi-grid methods, 
2. to speed up computations using parallel numerical methods. 
 
Contents  
 
Multi-grid methods [20 lectures] : Review of classical finite difference schemes for numerical 
solution of partial differential equations, Fourier analysis for error propogation, influence of grid 
parameters, grid hierarchies, multi -grid cycles, convergence monitors, smoother, W -cycle and 
nested iteration, coarse -grid solver, multigrid as a preconditioner, Numerical implementations 
with Diffpack programming 
 
Parallel Computing [20 lectures] : Need for parallel computation, different hardware 
architectures, message -passing programming model, multicomputer model, OPEN MP, MPI, 
CUDA, parallel linear algebra operations, parallel algorithms for linear systems with special 
structures, parallel impl ementation of direct and iterative methods for solution of linear 
systems, parallelizing finite difference schemes (wave Equation, heat condunction equation)  
 
 
Textbooks  
1. Langtangen H. P. and Tveito, A. (Editors) (2003) Advanced topics in computational 
partial differential equations: Numerical methods and Diffpack programming, Springer 
2. Briggs, W. L., Henson, V. E., and McCormick, S. F. (2000) A multigrid tutorial, 2nd Ed., 
SIAM 
3. Grama, A., Gupta, A., Karypis, G., and Kumar, V. (2003) Introduction to paralle l 
computing, 2nd Ed,  Pearson 
 
Reference Books  
1. Quarteroni, A. and Valli, A. (1997), Numerical approximations of partial differential 
equations, 2nd Edition, Springer 
2. Bertsekas, D. P. and Tsitsiklis, J. N. (1997) Parallel and distributed computation: 
Numerical methods, Prentice-Hall 
  
Online Course Material  
1. M. Ramakrishna, Introduction to computational fluid dynamics, NPTEL course material, 
Department of Aerospace Engineering Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 
https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/101106045/ 
2. Subodh Kumar, Parallel Computing,  NPTEL course material, Department of Computer 
Science and Engineering Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106102114/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Title Financial Engineering Number MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA) Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Securities Pricing Securities, Risk Management Assessment, prediction and decision making, 
under uncertainty, regarding future events and their consequences 
2. Portfolio Optimization Balancing risk and return 
3. Modeling Pricing of derivatives and Itos calculus 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Valuation of financial portfolio 
2. Pricing of financial derivatives (options and contracts) 
3. Understanding risk and return 
 
Contents  
 
[18 lectures]Introduction to financial markets and financial instruments, financial derivatives, risk 
and return, risky and risk free assets, interest rates, bonds, bonds pricing, spot and forward rates, 
investment portfolio, mean-variance analysis, capital asset pricing model, arbitrage pricing theory. 
 
[22 lectures] Discrete time models, stock and money market models, principle of no arbitrage,  
pricing of contracts (forward and future), options, put -call parity, option pricing, martingales, 
Binomial model, CRR model, Black -Scholes formula, Greeks, random walk, Brownian motion, 
stochastic process, Itos integral and Ito-Deoblins formula. 
 
Textbook  
1. M. Capinski and T. Zastawniak (2010). Mathematics for finance: an introduction to financial 
engineering, Springer.  
2. S.N. Neftci (2009). Principles of financial engineering. Academic Press/Elsevier. 
 
Reference Books  
1. J.C. Hull (2011). Options, futures and other derivatives. Pearson India. 
2. S.E. Shreve (2000). Stochastic calculus for finance I: The binomial asset pricing model, 
Springer 
 
Online Course Material 
Not Available 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Title Reliability Theory Number MAL8XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA)  Type Elective 
Prerequisite Probability and Statistics   
 
Objectives  
1. To understand the basic concepts of statistical reliability theory and their various real -life 
applications. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. Understand the basic notion of systems, different reliability measures, different notions of 
ageings, different semiparametric models, shock models and dependence structures; 
2. Gain the ability to handle different issues in system reliability. 
 
Contents  
Basic Notion of Systems [6 lectures] : Structure function , coherent systems, k-out-of-n systems, 
dual structures, cut and path sets, modular decomposition. 
 
Reliability Measures [5 lectures] : Survival/Reliability functions, hazard rate function, reversed 
hazard rate function, residual lifetime, inactivity time, mean residual lifetime function, mean 
inactivity time, reliability bounds. 
 
Semiparametric Models [6 lectures]: Common life distributio ns, scale model , proportional hazard 
rate model, proportional reversed hazard rate model, proportional odds model, proportional mean 
residual lifetime model. 
 
Stochastic Ageings [8 lectures]:  Notions of stochastic ageing, different ageing classes, ageing 
properties of common life distributions, closure properties of different ageing classes under 
formation of coherent structures, convolutions and mixtures. 
 
Shock Models and Dependence Structures [7 lectures]:  Univariate and bivariate shock models, 
notions of bivariate and multivariate dependence structures. 
 
Issues in System Reliability [10 lectures]:  Maintenance and replacement policies, availability of 
repairable systems, optimization of system reliability with redundancy. 
 
Text Books  
1. Barlow, R.E. and Proschan, F. (1975). Statistical Theory of Reliability and Life Testing . Holt, 
Rinehart and Winston, New York. 
2. Lai, C.D. and Xie, M. (2006). Stochastic Ageing and Dependence for Reliability . Springer, 
New York. 
3. Marshall, A.W. and Olkin, I. (2007). Life Distributions. Springer, New York. 
 
Reference Books  
1. Barlow, R.E. and Proschan, F. (1965). Mathematical Theory of Reliability. Wiley, New York. 
2. Samaniego, F.J. (2007). System Signatures and their Applications in Engineering 
Reliability. Sprin ger, New York.  
 
Online Course Material 
Not Available 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Title Representations of finite groups Number MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA) Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
1. The goal of this course is to give an introduction to representation theory and to understand 
representations of symmetric groups. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Representation theory and characters of finite groups. 
2. Representation theory of Symmetric groups. 
 
Contents 
Group Action and Modules[6 Lectures]: Groups and Examples (Recall), Group action, Conjugacy 
Classes, Modules: Definition and Examples. 
 
Basic concepts of Representation Theory[10 Lectures]: Representations and basic          examples, 
FG-modules, Group algebra, Irreducible representations, complete reducibility and Maschke’s 
theorem, Schur’s lemma. 
 
Characters and Burnside’s pq Theorem[10 Lectures]: Character theory of representations, 
orthogonality relations, decomposition of the regular representation. Character Tables of some 
groups, Characters and Algebraic Integers, Burnside’s pq-theorem. 
 
Representation theory of symmetric groups[16 Lectures]: Tensor products, Restriction of a 
representation, induced representations, Frobenius reciprocity, Mackey’s irreducibility criterion, 
Representation theory of symmetric groups, Few applications of Representation Theory (if time 
permits). 
 
Text Books 
1. Benjamin Steinberg, Representation Theory of Finite Groups, Springer (Universitext), 
2012. 
2. Gordon James and Martin Liebeck, Representations and Characters of Groups, Cambridge 
University Press, 2001. 
 
Reference Books 
1. William Fulton and Joe Harris, Representation Theory: A First Course, Springer (Graduate 
Texts in Mathematics 129), 1991. 
2. Amritanshu Prasad, Representation Theory: A Combinatorial Viewpoint, Cambridge 
University Press, 2015. 
 
Online Course Material 
Not Available 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Title Computational Linguistics Number CSL8XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech./PhD Type Elective  
Prerequisite Basic Probability Theory   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Enable students to develop computational models for languages. 
2. Introduced linguistic structure of an unfamiliar language in terms of morphology, syntax, 
and orthography. 
3. Impart knowledge of linguistic descriptions of a language combined with some textual 
resource in the language. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Do an exhaustive search of resources in and about a language without many resources. 
2. Resolve technical, logistical, and ethical issues involved in constructing a keyboard layout 
for a language's morphology and orthography. 
3. Design and implement general approaches in rule-based machine translation. 
 
Contents  
 
Introduction[2 Lectures] : Definition of computational linguistics, Ambiguity and uncertainty in 
language, The Turing test. 
Regular Expressions [6 Lectures] : Chomsky hierarchy, regular languages, and their limitations, 
Finite-state automata, Practical regular expressions for finding and counting language phenomena, 
morphology, syntax and orthography. 
String Edit Distance[6 Lectures]: Key algorithmic tool: dynamic programming, optimal alignment of 
sequences, String edit operations, edit distance, spelling correction, and machine translation.  
Context Free Grammar [4 Lectures] : Constituency, CFG definition, use and limitations. Chomsky 
Normal Form, Top-down parsing, bottom-up parsing, Efficient CFG parsing with CYK, Earley parser.  
Language model ling[10 Lectures] : Definition of information and its measurement, noisy channel 
model, the language Shannon game, Entropy, cross -entropy and information gain for language 
phenomena, Probabilistic language modelling and its applications, estimating the prob ability of a 
word, and smoothing, Generative models of language and their application to building an 
automatically-trained email spam filter, and automatically determining the language. 
Part of Speech Tagging [4 Lectures] : The concept of parts -of-speech, examples and usage, the 
Penn Treebank and Brown Corpus, Collocations and Noun Phrase Parsing. 
Word Sense Disambiguation and Clustering [10 Lectures] : Homonomy, polysemy, different 
meanings, the power of context, Language neighbourhood as a vector, Agglomera tive clustering, 
Clustering by expectation maximization, Using clustering to discover different word senses, Semi -
supervised document classification.  
 
Textbook  
1. Grishman, R. (1986) Computational Linguistics: An Introduction, Cambridge University 
Press. 
2. Rosner, M. and Johnson, R. (1992) Computational Linguistics and Formal Semantics, 
Cambridge University Press. 
3. Jurafsky, D. (2000) Speech & Language Processing, Pearson Education India. 
 
Reference Books  
1. Mitkov, R. (2004) The Oxford Handbook of Computational Linguistics, Oxford University 
Press. 
2. Manning, C.D. and Schütze, H. (1999) Foundations of Statistical Natural Language 
Processing, MIT Press. 
 
Online Course Material 
 
  
 
Title Computational Economics Number MAL8XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA) Type Elective  
Prerequisite Basic knowledge of Optimization techniques   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Enable students to understand computational economic models. 
2. Impart knowledge to design expressive marketplaces. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Do an exhaustive search of computational economic models. 
2. Analyse expressive marketplaces. 
3. Design and implement optimal market mechanisms. 
 
Contents  
[6 Lectures]  Definition of computational economics, basic techniques from mathematics, Linear 
programming, (Mixed) integer linear programming, Computational problems, Algorithms, Runtime 
of algorithms, Easy and hard problems. 
 
[12 Lectures]  Single-item auctions, Combi natorial auctions, Bidding languages, Winner 
determination problem, Reverse auctions and exchanges, Expressive financial securities, Barter 
exchanges/matching markets. 
 
[12 Lectures] Kidney exchange, Expressive negotiation over donations, Voting and social  choice, 
Iterative mechanisms/preference elicitation.  
 
[12 Lectures]  Risk neutrality and risk aversion, Expected utility theory, Incentive compatibility, 
Individual rationality, Revelation principle, Clarke mechanism, Groves mechanisms, Automated 
mechanism design and Proper scoring rules. 
 
Textbook  
1. Miranda, M.J. and Fackl er, P.L. (2004) Applied Computational Economics and Finance, MIT 
Press. 
2. Afonso, O. and Vasconcelos, P.B. (2015) Computational Economics: A concise introduction, 
Routledge. 
 
Reference Books  
1. Stokey, N.L. (1989) Recursive Methods in Economic Dynamics, Harvard University Press. 
2. Chen, S.-H., Kaboudan, M. and Du, Y. -R. (2018) The Oxford Handbook of Computational 
Economics and Finance, Oxford University Press. 
 
Online Course Material 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Title Computational Chemistry Number CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS) Type Elective 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Describe knowledge of modern techniques in computational methods applied in chemistry.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
1. Use modern computational chemistry techniques to solve fundamental problems related to 
chemistry. 
 
Contents 
Basics: Fundamentals of quantum, classical, and statistical mechanics, mathematical techniques 
(10 lectures) 
Electronic structure: Variation theory, perturbation theory, electron spin, He atom, Pauli exclusion 
principle, Slater determinant (6 lectures)  
Electronic structure of diatomic molecules: Born Oppenheimer approximation, Atomic uni ts, H2+ 
ion, H2 molecule, VB theory, MO theory (8 lectures)  
Wave function based theory: Hartree -Fock theory, Electron correlation, Self -consistent field wave 
function, Moller-Plesset theory, Coupled cluster formulation (10 lectures)  
Basics of Molecular Dynamics: Theoretical foundation, Boltzmann’s relation, harmonic oscillator and 
harmonic baths, Algorithms for equations of motions (7 lectures) 
 
Textbook 
1. Levine, I. N., (2000) Quantum Chemistry, Pearson education. 
2. Lowe, J. P., (1995) Elementary Quantum Chemistry, Academic Press. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Szabo, A. and Ostlund, N. S., (1996) Modern Quantum Chemistry, Dover. 
2. D. Frenkel and B. Smith, (2002), Understanding Molecular Dynamics Simulations,1st Edition, 
Academic Press  
 
Self learning Material 
1. K. Mangala Sunder, Introduction to Chemistry & Quantum Chemical Methods, NPTEL course 
material, Department of Chemistry, IIT Madras, http://nptel.iitm.ac.in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 