Source: http://intra.iitj.ac.in/acad_website/pg_curriculum/Metallurgical%20and%20Materials%20Engineering_06092019.pdf
================================================================================

 
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur 
 
   
 
 
 
 
PG Course Booklet 
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur 
July 2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
M.Tech.  
In 
Metallurgical and Materials Engineering 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 
Metallurgical and Materials Engineering is an interdisciplinary branch that deals with converting ore 
into a product by focusing on design, extraction, processing, and characterization of  materials for 
aerospace, automotive, energy, electronics, and healthcare applications. The following are the 
focus areas of the Department: (a) Process Metallurgy, (b) Structural Materials, (c) Functional 
Materials, and (d) Computational Materials Engineering. While the Process Me tallurgy deals with 
mineral beneficiation and metal extraction, the Structural Materials deals with understanding the 
process-microstructure-property correlation to expand the application of a given material. In the 
Functional Materials research, materials  for specific functions such as energy harvesting, 
healthcare, and information processing are studied. The Computational Materials Engineering 
provides understanding of materials from atomistic to macro length scales, and help in materials 
selection, alloy design, and improvement of metallurgical processes. 
Objective 
 To produce professionals with deep understanding of experimental and computational 
materials engineering, capable of providing innovative solutions for materials challenges in 
energy, electronics, aerospace, automotive, and healthcare industries. 
 To train the students for the roles of future academicians, scientists, innovators, and 
entrepreneurs. 
 
Graduate attributes 
 Ability to correlate electronic structure with transport properties of materials 
 Skill set to optimize microstructure and determine structure-property correlation 
 Ability to design and execute experiments for studying mechanical behavior of materials, 
and develop mechanistic models for failure prediction 
 Ability to determine metallurgical processing parameters for extraction of ferrous and non-
ferrous metals, and design process cycle to convert ore to final product 
 Ability to fabricate components following traditional and non-traditional manufacturing 
processes 
 Ability to characterize features at atomic, nano-, meso-, micro- and macro- length scales 
 Ability to innovate materials for next generation energy, electronic and healthcare devices  
 Skills to communicate the scientific findings to peers and general public  
 Appreciation and adherence to professional ethics 
  Ability to design and execute technical projects 
 
Learning Outcome 
Ability to  
 Design the materials by microstructure control to meet the required properties 
 Use various modeling techniques for studying physical, mechanical, functional and transport 
properties of materials 
 Apply thermodynamics and kinetics principles to understand and control materials processes  
 Fabricate structural and functional materials through traditional and non-traditional 
manufacturing processes 
 Use various material characterization tools 
 Apply principles of material deformation to predict failure of materials for reliable design of 
structures 
 Understand the process metallurgy involved in ferrous and non-ferrous metal extraction 
 Define a scientific problem and devise  an appropriate methodology for addressing the 
problem 
 Identify normative commitments of technological knowledge, artifacts and familiarity with 
the manifold responsibilities linked to their profession. 
 Critically develop linguistic competence and subject competence in the genres of technical 
communication. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Program structure with courses 
Cat. Course Number, Course Title L-T-P-D Credits  Cat. Course Number, Course Title L-T-P-D Credits 
I Semester  II Semester 
MC MT7LXX0 Metallurgical 
Thermodynamics and 
Kinetics 
3-1-0-0 4  MC MT7LXX0 Computational 
Materials Engineering 
3-0-2-0 4 
MC MT7LXX0 Characterization of 
Minerals, Metals and 
Materials 
3-0-2-0 4  MC MT7LXX0 Phase 
Transformations in 
Solids 
3-0-2-0 4 
ME MT7LXX0 Program Elective -1  3-0-0-0 3  ME MT7LXX0 Program Elective-3 3-0-0-0 3 
ME MT7LXX0 Program Elective -2  3-0-0-0 3  ME MT7LXX0 Program Elective-4  3-0-0-0 3 
NH HSN7XX0 Technical 
Communication 
1-0-0-0 1  NH OAL7XX0 
 
Innovation andIP 
Management  
1-0-0-0 1 
Total 15  Total 15 
III Semester  IV Semester 
ME MT7LXX0 Program Elective-5  3-0-0-0 3  MO  Open Elective-2 3-0-0-0 3 
ME MT7LXX0 Program Elective-6  3-0-0-0 3  MP MT7DXX0 Project (Stage-II) 0-0-0-11 11 
MO  Open Elective-1 3-0-0-0 3  NH HSN7XX0 Professional Ethics 1-0-0-0 1 
MP MT7DXX0 Project (Stage-I) 0-0-0-5 5       
NH OAN7XX0 Systems Engineering 
and Project 
Management 
1-0-0-0 1       
Total 15  Total  15 
 
Distribution of Credits (M.Tech.) 
S.No. Category Category Title Total 
Courses 
Total Credits 
1 C Compulsory 4 16 
2 E  Program Electives 6 18 
2 O  Open Electives 2 6 
4 P Project 16 16 
Total     56 
 
Program electives can be taken from any of the following courses offered by the department. Open 
electives may be taken from other departments.  
Topic Clouds 
1. Metallurgical Thermodynamics and Kinetics 
 Laws of thermodynamics  
 Thermodynamics of solutions  
 Application of Thermodynamics to Chemical reactions 
 Phase diagrams 
 Thermodynamics of interfaces 
 Diffusion in solids 
2. Characterization of Minerals Metals and Materials 
 Optical Microscopy 
 Scanning Electron Microscopy 
 Transmission Electron Microscopy 
 Scanning Probe Microscopy 
 Spectroscopic characterization 
 X-Ray Diffraction 
 Electron Diffraction. 
 Thermal Analysis 
 Non-destructive testing of materials 
3. Computational Materials Engineering 
 First principles calculations 
 Molecular dynamics simulations 
 Alloy Design 
4. Phase Transformations and Solidification 
 Thermodynamics of phase transformations 
  Solid state phase transformations 
 Solidification process 
 Gating and riser design for casting 
 Nucleation and growth 
5. Material Processing 
 Light Metal and Alloys 
o Processing of light metals and alloys 
 Additive manufacturing 
o Materials for additive manufacturing 
o Additive manufacturing methods  
o Structure-property control in additive manufacturing 
 Thermo Mechanical Processing 
o Principles and applications of thermo- mechanical processing 
6. Microstructure Design and Mechanical Properties 
 Effect of microstructure on mechanical properties 
 Strengthening mechanisms 
 High Temperature deformation 
 Deformation behavior of ceramics and polymeric materials 
 Theory of fracture mechanics 
 Cyclic deformation of materials 
 Creep-Fatigue interaction 
7. Electrochemistry and Corrosion 
 Fundamentals of electrochemistry 
 Forms of corrosion 
 Corrosion Prevention methods 
 High temperature oxidation 
 Corrosion monitoring 
8. Ceramics and Composites 
 Structural Ceramics 
 Processing of ceramics  
 Functional ceramics 
 Metal Matrix Composites 
 Polymer Matrix Composites 
 Ceramic matrix composites 
 
 
 
List of Electives  
Following is the list of courses that can be offered to M.Tech. Students 
(A) ELECTIVE I: Materials Modeling and Simulation  
Course 
Number 
Course Title L-T-P-D Credits 
MT7LXX0 Alloy Design : Computational Thermodynamic 
approach 
3-0-2-0 4 
(B) ELECTIVE II: Extractive and Process Metallurgy 
Course 
Number 
Course Title L-T-P-D Credits 
MT7LXX0 Mineral Engineering 3-0-0-0 3 
MT7LXX0 Iron and Steel Making 3-0-0-0 3 
MT7LXX0 Solidification Processing 3-0-0-0 3 
MT7LXX0 Industrial Waste: Control and Utilization 3-0-0-0 3 
(C) ELECTIVE III: Metallurgical Manufacturing  
Course 
Number 
Course Title L-T-P-D Credits 
MT7LXX0 Light Metals and Alloys 3-0-0-0 3 
MT7LXX0 Near Net Forming  3-0-0-0 3 
MT7LXX0 Powder Metallurgy 3-0-0-0 3 
MT7LXX0 Thermo Mechanical Processing 3-0-0-0 3 
MT7LXX0 Material Aspects in Additive Manufacturing 3-0-0-0 3 
(D) ELECTIVE IV: Physical Metallurgy 
Course 
Number 
Course Title L-T-P-D Credits 
MT7LXX0 Plastic Deformation and Microstructure Evolution 3-0-0-0 3 
MT7LXX0 Corrosion Engineering 3-0-0-0 3 
MT7LXX0 Introduction to Dislocations  3-0-0-0 3 
MT7LXX0 Structure-Property-Correlation 3-0-0-0 3 
MT7LXX0 Mechanical Behavior of Materials 3-0-2-0 4 
MT7LXX1 Electron and Scanning Probe Microscopy 1-0-0-0 1 
MT7LXX2 Light Microscopy and Spectroscopic Techniques 1-0-0-0 1 
MT7LXX3 Diffraction and Thermal Analysis Techniques 1-0-0-0 1 
MT7PXX4 Materials Characterization Laboratory 0-0-2-0 1 
 (E) ELECTIVE V: Functional Materials and Devices  
Course 
Number 
Course Title L-T-P-D Credits 
MT7LXX0 Ceramics  3-0-0-0 3 
MT7LXX0 Composites  3-0-0-0 3 
MT7LXX0 Polymers and their composites 3-0-0-0 3 
MT7LXX0 Principles of Engineering Material Selection 3-0-0-0 3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DETAILED SYLLABUS FOR THE COMPULSORY COURSES 
 
Title Metallurgical Thermodynamics and 
Kinetics 
Number MT7LXX0 
Department  Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–1–0 [4] 
Offered for M.Tech. and Ph.D. Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite  
 
Objectives 
1. Provide a basis for describing and understanding the stability of various forms of 
matter. 
2. Provide a basis for predicting the properties of an equilibrated system as a function of 
its content and characteristics. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Establish the conditions for stability of a material and derive its properties.  
2. Control the evolution of microstructures with respect to different parameters. 
 
Course Content 
 
Laws of thermodynamics and Chemical reactions (14 lectures) 
 
First, second and third laws (3 lectures) 
statistical interpretation of entropy (3 lectures)  
Free energy functions and criteria for equilibrium (3 lectures) 
reaction equilibrium, equilibrium constant; applications to materials and metallurgical 
systems (5 lectures). 
 
Thermodynamics of solutions and phase diagrams (14 lectures) 
 
Ideal and non -ideal solutions, partial and molar quantities, quasi -chemical model and 
regular solutions (3 lectures). 
Phase rule and binary phase diagrams (2 lectures),  
free energy composition diagrams (5 lectures) 
phase equilibrium calculations. (4 lectures) 
 
Thermodynamics of interfaces and kinetics(14 lectures) 
 
Interfaces, surface tension and surface energy (3 lectures) 
equilibrium at interfaces, nucleation (3 lectures),  
coherency (1 lecture), 
thermal activation, diffusion, concentration gradients, thermal gradients (3 lectures) 
Fick’s laws, mechanisms of interface migration (3 lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. Gaskell, D.R., Introduction to Metallurgical Thermodynamics, McGraw-Hill 1995. 
2. Swalin, R. A.,  Thermodynamics of Solids, reprint Edition, Wiley, 1962. 
3. Balluffi, R. W., Samuel, M. A., Carter, W. C., Kinetics of Materials, Wiley, 2005. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
1. Bird, R.B., Stewart, W.E. and Lightfoot, E.N., Transport Phenomena, Wiley, 1960. 
2. Hillert, M.,Phase Equilibria, Phase Diagrams and Phase Transformations Their 
Thermodynamic Basis, Second edition, Cambridge University Press 2008. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Title Characterization of Minerals Metals 
and Materials 
Number MT7LXX0 
Department  Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–2 [4] 
Offered for M.Tech. 1st Year Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite  
 
Objective 
1. Understanding the instruments and methods for characterising different materials and 
their properties.   
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. Basic working principles for various instruments. 
2. Choice of characterization methods based on their analysis and performance. 
 
Course Content 
 
MTL7XX1: Electron and Scanning Probe Microscopy [1-0-0] 
Introduction: Importance of Characterization of Materials, Structural and Functional 
Characterizations, Review of Crystallography. (4 Lectures) 
Electron Microscopies : Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) & Transmission Electron 
Microscopy (TEM). (7 Lectures) 
Scanning Probe Microscopy : Scanning Tunnelling Microscopy (SEM) & Atomic Force 
Microscopy (AFM). (3 Lectures) 
MTL7XX2: Light Microscopy and Spectroscopic Techniques [1-0-0] 
Light Optical Microscopy : Polarization microscopy for minerals, Phase contrast 
microscopy for metals, DIC Microscopy and Confocal and other special techniques for 
polymers and biomaterials. (7 Lectures) 
Spectroscopic characterization : UV-VIS-NIR, FTIR, Photoluminescence and Raman 
Spectroscopy. (7 Lectures) 
MTL7XX3: Diffraction and Thermal Analysis Techniques [1-0-0] 
Diffraction Techniques: X-Ray Diffraction, Electron Diffraction. (10 Lectures) 
Thermal Analysis : Thermal Mechanical Analysis (TMA), Di fferential Scanning 
Calorimetric (DSC), Thermal Gravimetric Analysis (TGA), Differential Thermal Analysis 
(DTA). (4 Lectures) 
MTP7XX4: Materials Characterization Laboratory [0-0-2] 
Calculation of thermodynamic parameters usingDSC analysis; Functional group analysis    
            using FTIR; XRD Pattern Indexing; Lattice parameter and crystallite size              
            calculation; Electron Diffraction Pattern Indexing;Image Analysis. 
 
Text Books 
1. Zhang, S., Li, L. and Kumar, A., Materials Characterization Techniques, CRC Press, 2008. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
1.    Evans, C., Brundle. R. and Wilson, Encyclopaedia of Materials Characterization: Surfaces, 
Interfaces, Thin Films (Materials Characterization Series), Butterworth-Heinemann, 1992. 
2.    Kaufmann, E.N., Characterization of Materials, 3 Volume Set, 2nd Edition, Wiley, 2012. 
 
Online Course Material 
1. Shankaran, S., Materials Characterization, Department of Metallurgical & Materials 
Engineering,  Indian Institute of Technology, Madras, NPTEL 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113106034/ 
2. Biswas, K. and Gurao, N.P., Advanced Characterization Techniques, Department of 
Materials Science and Engineering,  Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, NPTEL 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113104004 
 
 
 
Title Computational Materials 
Engineering 
Number MT7LXX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials 
Engineering 
L-T-P [C] 3–0–2 [4] 
Offered for M.Tech. and Ph.D. Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite  
 
Objective 
1. To understand different modeling and simulations techniques for studying various 
materials. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
 
1. Student will be able to understand and use the first-principles calculations 
2. Student will be able to understand and run the Molecular dynamics simulations 
 
Course Content 
 
First-principles calculations (28 lectures)  
 
        Introduction, Density functional theory (5 lectures), Kohn-Sham method (4 lectures), 
Exchange-correlation energy (2 lectures), Crystal structure (1 lecture), Pseudopotential approach 
(2 lectures), Bloch’s theorem (2 lectures), Structure relaxation (1 lecture), Electronic band 
structure and density of states (3 lectures), Fermi-Dirac distribution (1 lecture), Smearing 
methods (1 lectures), Lattice dynamics (1 lectures), Phonon dispersion relations (1 lect ure), 
Force constants (3 lectures), Vibrational thermodynamics (1 lecture) 
 
Molecular dynamics simulations (14 lectures) 
 
Introduction (1 lecture), Potentials (2 lectures), Newtons Equation of motion (2 lectures), 
Algorithms (2 lectures), Simulation parameters (2 lectures), Types of ensembles (2 lectures), 
Temperature control and data analysis (3 lectures) 
 
Laboratory Experiments 
 
Preparation of input files, Technical parameters optimization, Structure optimization, Electronic 
band structure calculation, density of states calculation, metallic system simulation, phonon band 
structure calculation 
 
 
Text Books 
1. Lee, J., Computational Materials Science: An Introduction, 2nd Edition, CRC Press 2016. 
2. Sholl, D. S., and Steckel, J. A., Density Functional Theory: A Practical Introduction, 1st 
Edition, Wiley, 2009. 
3. Dove, M.T., Introduction to Lattice Dynamics, 1st Edition, Cambridge University Press, 
1993. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
1. Parr, R.G., and Yang, W., Density-Functional Theory of Atoms and Molecules, 1st Edition, 
Oxford Science Publications, 1994. 
2. Raabe, D., Computational Materials Science: The Simulation of Materials, Microstructures 
and Properties, Wiley VCH, 1998. 
 
Online Course Materials 
MIT open courseware:  Gerbrand Ceder, and Nicola Marzari. 3.320 Atomistic Computer 
Modeling of Materials (SMA 5107). Spring 2005. Massachusetts Institute of Technology: 
MIT OpenCourseWare, https://ocw.mit.edu. License: Creative Commons BY-NC-SA 
 
 
Title Phase Transformations in Solids Number MT7LXX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–2 [4] 
Offered for M.Tech. and Ph.D. Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite  
 
Objective 
1. Understanding the correlation between the phase diagram and chemical 
thermodynamics for alloy design. 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Ability to construct multicomponent phase diagrams using computational 
thermodynamic approach. 
2.  Understand the variation of properties with the microstructure evolution during phase 
transformations. 
 
Course Content 
 
Thermodynamics and kinetics: free energy, order of transformation, driving force, 
homogeneous and heterogeneous nucleation, growth kinetics, coarsening, 
precipitation. (8 Lectures) 
Interfaces: atomic mechanisms of diffusion, activation energy, interfacial free energy, 
types of interface (coherent, semi -coherent and incoherent interfaces), interface 
migration. (6 Lectures) 
Austenite, transformation of austenite, TTT diagram, eutectoid transformation, pearlite 
and bainite transformation. (8 Lectures) 
Martensite transformation: characteristics and nature, m orphology, crystallography, 
theory of nucleation and growth, and pre -martensite phenomena, martensitic 
transformation in steel. (6 Lectures) 
Precipitation hardening and spinodal decomposition: Solutionising and ageing, GP 
zones, intermediate phases and str uctural changes, spinodal decomposition. (8 
Lectures) 
Order-disorder transformation: common structures in ordered alloys, variation of order 
with temperature; determination of degree of ordering, effect of ordering on 
properties, applications. (6 Lectures) 
 
Laboratory Experiments: Hardenability measurement, Solid -liquid transformation, 
Activation energy calculation, Heat treatment of ferrous metals, Precipitation 
Hardening, TTT Diagram construction. 
  
Text Books 
1. Raghavan, V., Solid State Phase Transformations, 1st edition, Prentice Hall 
India, 1987. 
2. Porter, D.A., Easterling, K. E., and Sherif, M.Y., Phase Transformation in 
Metals and Alloys, 3rd edition, CRC Press, 2009. 
3.   Abbaschian, R., Abbaschian, L., and Reed-Hill, R. E., Physical Metallurgy Principles, 
4th edition, Cengate Learning, 2009. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
1.   Khachaturyan, A.G., Theory of Structural Transformations in Solids, 1st edition, 
Dover publications, 2008. 
2.   Avner, S.H., Introduction to Physical Metallurgy, 2nd edition, McGraw Hill 
Education, 2017. 
 
Online Course Material: 
1. Gururajan, M.P., Phase Transformations and Heat Treatment, Indian 
Institute of Technology Bombay, NPTEL 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113101003/ 
 
 
SYLLABUS FOR ELECTIVES OFFERED BY 
 DEPARTMENT OF METALLURGICAL AND MATERIALS ENGINEERING:  
 
Title Alloy Design : Computational Thermodynamic 
Approach 
Number MT7LXX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–2 [4] 
Offered for M.Tech Type Elective 
Prerequisite  
 
Objectives 
1. Understanding the correlation between the phase diagram and chemical 
thermodynamics for alloy design. 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Ability to construct multicomponent phase diagrams using computational 
thermodynamic approach. 
2. Ability to learn the assessment of binary phase diagram using PARROT module. 
 
Contents 
1. Thermodynamics of Solution:  Ideal solution, configurational entropy, regular 
solution model, chemical potential, free energy composition diagram, evolution 
of phase diagrams quasichemical theory, Sub regular solution model. (8 
Lectures) 
2. Alloy Design of multicomponent system:  Redlitch-kister polynomial, Muggianu 
and kohler extrapolation. Crystallography in thermodynamics, Order and 
disorder structure, antisite defect and vacancies. Compound energy formalism. 
Modeling of Interstitial and substitutional phases, stoichiometric and non -
stoichiometric compounds. (14 Lectures) 
3. CALPHAD modeling of non - metallic system. Cluster variance model. (6 
Lectures) 
4. Calculation of thermodynamic parameters:  First principle calculation, Semi -
empirical-Miedema approach. Calorimetric measurement, electroch emical 
measurement, Diffusion couple method. (8 Lectures) 
5. Assessment of thermodynamic system:  Optimization of binary isomorphous 
and eutectic phase diagram using PARROT module. (6) 
 
Lab Experiments 
Construction of equilibrium and non -equilibrium phase diagram, Vertical section 
phase diagram and Property diagram for multi -component alloys, Scheil and 
equilibrium solidification simulation, Liquidus projections and monovariant 
reactions in ternary phase  equilibria, Creation of user defined thermodynamic 
database for Solid solution, Stoichiometric compounds, non -stoichiometric 
compounds.  
 
Textbooks 
1. Saunders   and   Miodownik, CALPHAD (Calculation of Phase Diagrams): A 
Comprehensive Guide, 1st Edition, Pergamman Press, 1998 
2. Hans Lukas , Suzana G. Fries , Bo Sundman , Computational Thermodynamics: 
The Calphad Method, Cambridge University Press, 2007 
 
 
Self-Learning Material 
1. Porter, D.A., Easte rling, K. E., and Sherif, M.Y., Phase Transformation in 
Metals and Alloys, 3rd edition, CRC Press, 2009 
 
Online Course Materials 
1. Murty, B.S., Advanced Metallurgical Thermodynamics , NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Metallurgical and Materials Engineering , Indian Institute of Technology 
Madras, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113106031/. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Title Mineral Engineering Number MT7LXX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.  Type Elective 
Pre-requisite  
 
Objective 
1. To introduce the importance of mineral processing and engineering. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Ability to engineer selective mineral processing. 
 
Course Content 
1. Introduction to Mineral Geology : Geological formation of minerals. Classification and 
identification of minerals. (4 lectures) 
2. Introduction to Mineral Engineering: Various ore dressing methods, their principles and 
applications. Role of cavitation, Gravity separation, Heap  bioleaching, Fundamentals and 
Plant practices of beneficiation, Surface properties and selective flotation, Mineral 
Liberation: Random and non-random breakage. (10 lectures) 
3. Mineral Processing: Solid Liquid and Liquid -Liquid processing methods, gas phase 
extraction. (8 lectures) 
4. Metal Recovery:  Phase extraction in metal recovery, Recovery of metals from slag waste, 
Heavy metal removal mechanism. (8 lectures) 
5. Mineral Processing of special materials (from brine and mineral resources), rare earths, 
vanadium, etc.(8 lectures) 
6. Characterization techniques in mineral processing:Rheology studies for flotation slurries. 
7. Simulation and control of column flotation.(4 lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. Wills, B.A. and Napier-Munn, T.J., Mineral Processing Technology, Elsevier Science & 
Technology Books, 7th Edition, 2006. 
2. Subbarao, D.V., Mineral Beneficiation: A Concise Basic Course, CRC Press, 2011.  
3. Flemings, M.C., Solidification Processing, McGraw Hill, 1974. 
4. German, R. M., Powder Metallurgy & Particulate Materials Processing, Metal Powder 
Industry, 2005. 
 
  
Title Iron and Steel Making Number MT7LXX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite  
 
Objective 
1. Introduce principles of iron and steel making and the field of special steels. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Understand the basics of metallurgy involved in iron and steel making. 
2. Describe the overview of processing of iron and steel. 
 
Course Content 
1. Iron making: sequence of operations, raw materials preparation, thermodynamics and 
kinetics. (6 lectures) 
2. Blast furnace: design, internal zones and gas flow, productivity, fuel efficiency, products. 
(4 lectures) 
3. Sponge Iron making and smelting reduction. (4 lectures) 
4. Reactions in steel making: removal of C, Si, Mn, P and S. (8 lectures) 
5. Design and selection of steel making slags and refractories. (8 lectures) 
6. Steel making: basic oxygen furnace processes, electric arc furnace and induction furnace 
steel making. (8 lectures) 
7. Secondary steel making processes, alloy steel making. (2 lectures) 
8. Special steels and their applications. (2 lectures) 
 
 Text Books 
1. Ghosh, A., and Chatterji, A., Ironmaking and Steelmaking: Theory and Practice, Prentice- 
Hall (India), 2008. 
2. Chatterjee, A., Beyond the Blast Furnace, CRC Press, 1994. 
3. Peacey, J.C. and W. G. Davenport, The Iron Blast Furnace: Theory and Practice, 
Pergamon, 1979. 
 
Self-Learning materials 
1. Making, Shaping and Treating of Steel, Vol.1: Iron Making, 11th Ed., AISE Steel 
Foundation, 1999. 
 
 Online Course Materials 
1. Koria, S.C., Steel Making, IIT Kanpur, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113104059 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
] 
 
Title Solidification Processing  Number MT7LXX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite  
 
Objective: 
1. Treat the fundamentals of liquid to solid transformation and practical implication 
to practice.  
2. Processes such as crystal growth, interface stability, splat cooling, ingot casting 
shape casting will be dealt with paying particular emphasis to fundamentals of 
mass transport, heat flow and interface kinetics. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Build up knowledge on fundamentals of solidification of metals and alloys and 
correlating with various casting processes.   
 
Course Content 
1. Casting and related phenomena:  Thermodynamics of nucleation and growth 
phenomena, crystal growth, grain refinement. (4 lectures) 
2. Solidification process: heat flow, plain front solidification, cellular solidification, 
constitutional supercooling, , formation of dendrites, eutectic solidification, 
monotectic solidification,  peritectic growth, effect of pressure on solidification. 
(14 lectures) 
3. Gating system: fluid flow, gating and riser design, Adams’ and Caine’s riser 
design, fluidity. (8 lectures) 
4. Solidification during welding, Directional solidification and single crystal 
fabrication. (8 lectures) 
5. Recent developments:  interface kinetics, interface dynamics,   phase selection, 
microstructure selection.  Effect of vibration. Theory convection effects. 
Multicomponent alloys and numerical techniques. (8 lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. Flemings,  M.C., Solidification Processing, Mcgraw-Hill Book Company, 1974. 
2. Campbell, J., Complete casting Handbook: Metal Casting Processes, Metallurgy, 
Techniques and Design,   Butterworth-Heinmann, 2015. 
1. Minkoff, I.,  Solidification and Cast Structure,  Wiley, 1986. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Title Industrial Waste: Control and Utilization 
 
Number MT7LXX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite  
 
Objective: 
1. Classification of waste products and technological management for their 
environmental sustainability 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Differentiate among the different kinds of waste. 
2. Find optimum method for waste management. 
 
Course Content 
1. Types of waste: Solid, Liquid and gaseous (4 lectures) 
2. Sources of waste: Industrial: Metallurgical, Pharma & Chemical, Electronic, 
Biological (8 lectures) 
3. Recycling of waste: Metal Scrap remelting, Extraction of precious and harmful 
metals from electronic  waste, (8 lectures) 
4. Waste to wealth: Waste for energy, Production of commercial nano particles from 
waste (8 lectures) 
5. Treatment Storage and Disposal of waste:  Long term storage Land filling, 
incineration; Short term storage and container materials (8 lectures) 
6. Case Studies: Nuclear industry, Biomedical industry, Steel industry (6 lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. Pichtel, J.,Waste Management Practices: Municipal, Hazardous, and Industrial, 2nd 
edition,  CRC Press, 2014. 
2. Choudhary, C. K., Waste management and bioremediation , Oxford Book 
Company, 2012. 
 
Self-Learning materials 
1. Wong, J. W. C, Surampalli, R. Y., Zhang, T. C., Tyagi, R. D., Selvan, 
A.,Sustainable Solid Waste Management,  American Society of Civil Engineers, 
2016. 
2. Ojovan, M. I., Handbook of Advanced Radioactive Waste Conditioning 
Technologies, Woodhead Publishing, 2011. 
 
Online Course Material 
1. Dubey, B. K., Electronic Waste Management - Issues and Challenges, Division of 
Environmental Engineering and Management at Indian Institute of Technology, 
Kharagpur, NPTEL, https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc18_ce07/preview 
2. Dubey, B. K., Integrated Waste Management for a Smart City, Division of Environmental 
Engineering and Management at Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, NPTEL, 
https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc17_ce20/preview 
3. Ramachandra, T. V., Municipal Solid Waste Management, Centre for Ecological Sciences, 
Indian Institute of Science,NPTEL, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/120108005/2# 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Title Light Metal and Alloys Number MT7LXX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite  
 
Objective 
1. Introduce the prospect of competitive structural materials with high specific strength.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Appreciate the role of light metals for energy savings in different applications/sectors. 
 
Course Content 
1. Introduction: Importance of light metals, overview of light metals production. (4 lectures) 
2. Techniques for melting and solidification: solidification, grain refinement, casting 
processes. (6 lectures) 
3. Heat treatment: grain refinement, strengthening by solid solution, precipitation 
hardening, dispersion of second phase particles. (8 lectures) 
4. Alloy designations and properties: specific alloy systems ((a) Al-alloys, (b) Mg-alloys, (c) 
Ti-alloys). (8 lectures) 
5. Manufacturing and applications: aerospace, biomedical, automobile, domestic appliances. 
(8 lectures) 
6. Novel processing methods: composites, metallic foams, rapid solidification, Quasi 
crystals, amorphous alloys, mechanical alloying, physical vapor deposition, additiv e 
manufacturing. (8 lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. Polmear, I. J., St. John, D., Nie, J. F., Qian, M, Light Alloys, 5th edition, Elsevier 2016. 
2. Brandes E. A. and Brook G. B., Smithells Light Metals Handbook, Elsevier, 1998. 
 
Self-Learning materials 
 
1. Totten G.E. and Mackenzie D.S., Handbook of Aluminum Vol. 1: Physical Metallurgy and 
Processes, CRC Press 2003. 
2. Friedrich H.E., and Mordike B.L., Magnesium Technology, Springer, 2004. 
3.                              Titanium, 2nd edition, Springer, 2007. 
 
 
 
 
  
Title Near Net Forming Number MT7LXX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   
 
Objective 
1. Industrial processing technique of near net forming for their applications.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Development of methods used by forging industry. 
 
Course Content 
1. Introduction and Application of Near net forming.(2 lectures) 
2. Manufacturing:  
a. Casting: Robo-casting, additive manufacturing by 3D printing, investment casting, 
near net casting, direct coagulation casting, low pressure injection molding, state 
of the art casting & foam casting. (4 lectures) 
b. Pressure less spark plasma sintering, miniature components sintering near net 
rolling of soft parts, cross wedge rolling process. (3 lectures) 
c. Spray forming:  electric arc spray forming, spraying -conform process & thermal 
spray forming. (3 lectures) 
d. Extrusion, infiltration, compound forming, precise shape forming, isothermal and 
near isothermal processing, friction stir forming & micro forming. (3 lectures) 
e. Thixo Methods:  semi-solid processing, thixo -forming, thixo extrusion, shape 
forming from colloidal processing, polymer impregnation and pyrolysis. (4 
lectures) 
f. Powder methods: Powder technology & die pressing powders. (3 Lectures) 
g. Other methods:  Net shaped heaping, laser metal deposition, warm spinning of 
cast iron, diffusion bonding, explosive welding, micro -forming, micro deep 
drawing, thermo hydrogen processing, spinning, shear forming and flow forming & 
bulge forming. (8 lectures) 
3. Materials: Bimetal, Ti and its composites, Al alloys (Al -Mg, Al-Ti, Al-Si), Ni super alloys, 
intermetallic porous materials, SiC, etc for different applications. (6 lectures) 
4. Biological applications: Clinical Therapeutics and Health Monitoring. (3 lectures) 
5. Engineering applications:  Turbine Blade, Thermal coatings and Hollow turbine blades. (3 
lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. Near Net Shape Manufacturing of Metal: A Review of Approaches and Their Evolutions, 
Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers Part B Journal of Engineering 
Manufacture, 2017. 
2. Grant, P. S., Spray forming, Progress in Materials Science, 39, 497-545, 1995. 
3. Waterman, N. A., The Selection of Materials, Engineering Design, 1982. 
 
Further reading 
1. G Giuliano, G., Superplastic Forming of Advanced Metallic Materials, Woodhead, 2011. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Course Title Powder Metallurgy Number MT7LXX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite None 
 
Objective 
1. Understand recent concepts in powder metallurgy and product design parameters.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Student will be able to conceptualize the powerful tool of powder metallurgy and directly 
apply to contemporary products. 
 
Course Content 
1. Introduction and application of powder metallurgy. (2 lectures) 
2. Powder production: (8 lectures) 
a. Different production methods namely physical, chemical, mechanical methods. 
b. Single fluid atomization: Rotating electrode atomization, roller atomization, 
rotating disc atomization. 
c. Two fluid atomization: Gas atomization, water atomization, oil atomization etc.  
d. Reduction methods: Carbonyl process, hydride -dehydride process & electrolytic 
method. 
3. Powder characterization: (10 lectures)  
Particle size and Size distribution using sieving, sedimentation method, Andreasen pipette 
method, size distribution functions like normal distribution, log -normal distribution, 
Rosin-Rammler distribution, particle shape, shape factors, specific surface area of 
powder, flow rate,  tap density, apparent density, compressibility, pyrophoricity, 
explosivity and toxicity of powder  
4. Powder compaction: (4 lectures)  
Die compaction, isostatic pressing, single level and multi -level part compaction, 
repressing, plane strain compression, powde r forging, powder roll compaction and 
powder extrusion  
5. Sintering: (10 lectures)  
Theory of sintering practice, types of furnaces and atmosphere control, activated 
sintering techniques, post -sintering treatments; industrial sintering practice for ferrous 
and non-ferrous products. 
6. Applications of powder metallurgy: Self-lubricating bearing, magnetic materials, tungsten 
carbide tool bits, bearing materials, dispersion strengthen materials for high temperature 
applications and manufacture of diamond based cutti ng tools, brake pads, etc. (8 
lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. German, R.M., Powder Metallurgy and Particulate Materials Processing, MPIF, 2005Sands, 
R.L. and Shakespeare C.R., Powder Metallurgy Practice and Applications, Newness  
2. Publications, 1970.  
3. Upadhyaya, G.S., Powder Metallurgy Technology, Cambridge Press 1996. 
 
Self-Learning materials 
1. Masuda, H., Powder Technology Handbook , Taylor & Francis 2006. Powder Metal 
Technologies and Applications, Metals Handbook, Vol.7, 9th edition, ASM, 1989. 
 
 
Online Course Material 
1. Schuh, C., 3.044 Materials Processing. Spring 2013. Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology: MIT OpenCourseWare, https://ocw.mit.edu. License: Creative Commons BY -
NC-SA. 
 
Course Title Thermo Mechanical Processing Number MT7LXX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   
 
Objective 
1. Methodology for developing varying microstructures to meet a range of properties for 
industrial applications.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
2. Development of methods using mechanical working and heat treatment effectively. 
 
Course Content 
1. Introduction: microstructure control, application of heat treatment. (4 lectures) 
2. Effect of mechanical working:  low temperature and dislocation structure, high 
temperature deformation and sub-structure evolution, concurrent relationship between 
flow properties and microstructure evolution. (12 lectures) 
3. Principles of thermo mechanical processing (TMP): single phase versus multi-phase 
materials, sequencing of mechanical working and heat treatment, concurrent 
manipulation of microstructure. (14 lectures) 
4. Application of TMP: deformation induced phase transformation, steel for car body, dual 
phase and TRIP steel, controlled rolling of HSLA steel, electrical steel, patented steel 
wire, aerospace applications (Aluminium, Special alloys). (12 lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. Krauss G., Steels: Processing, Structure and Performance, ASM Int'l Materials Park, 
2005. 
2. Verlinden, B., Driver, J., Samajdar, I. and Doherty, R. D., Thermo-Mechanical 
Processing of Metallic Materials, Elsevier, 2007. 
3. Krauss G., Principles of Heat Treatment of Steel, ASM Intl, 1989. 
 
Suggested References 
1. Sakaia, T., Belyakov, A., Kaibyshev, R., Miura, H. and Jonas, J.J., Dynamic and Post-
Dynamic Recrystallization Under Hot, Cold and Severe Plastic Deformation Conditions, 
Progress in Materials Science 60, 130-207 (2014). 
2. Sherby, O.D., Wadsworth, J., and Nieh, T. G., Superplasticity in Metals and Ceramics, 
Cambridge University Press, 2005. 
 
Web Resources 
1. Shekhar, S. and Gaur, A. Fundamentals of Materials Processing (Part- II)  Department 
of Materials Science and Engineering Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, NPTEL 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113104075/ 
2. Gururajan, M.P. , Phase Transformations and Heat Treatment, Department of 
Metallurgical Engineering and Materials Science, Indian Institute of Technology, 
Bombay, NPTEL, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113101003/ 
3. Schuh, C., 3.044 Materials Processing. Spring 2013. Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology: MIT Open Course Ware, https://ocw.mit.edu. License: Creative Commons 
BY-NC-SA. 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Course Title Material Aspects in Additive Manufacturing  Number MT7LXX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P 
[C] 
3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite None 
 
Objective: 
1. Understanding the metallurgical and materials engineering aspects of additive 
manufacturing. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Ability to learn the additive manufacturing process physics to design and 
fabricate the 3D parts with desired structure and property. 
2. Ability to monitor and control the additive manufacturing (AM) process. 
 
Course Content 
1. AM Overview : Direct Digital Manufacturing and their importance. Different AM 
processes and relevant Process Physics. (5 Lectures) 
2. AM Powder Production and Characterization: Different Mechanical and Chemical 
methods, Atomization of Powder, other emerging processes. Performance 
Evaluation of different processes. Chemical and Microstructural Characterization 
of powders. (6 Lectures) 
3. Transport phenomena model for AM process: Temperature, Fluid Flow and 
Composition. (6 Lectures) 
4. Metallurgical Aspects of AM process: Solidification. Texture. Non-equilibrium 
Microstructure. Residual stress. Process-Structure-Property relationship (8 
Lectures) 
5. Process monitoring and Control for AM: Defects, Geometry, Temperature, 
Composition and Phase Transformation (6 Lectures) 
6. Post processing of AM parts: Support material removal. Machining. Heat 
Treatment. Hot Isostatic Processing. Hybrid manufacturing. (6 Lectures) 
7. Applications of Additive Manufacturing: Additive Manufacturing in Aerospace, 
Automotive, Electronics industries and Biomedical applications. (5 Lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. Gibson I., David W. R., Stucker B., Additive Manufacturing Technologies: 3D 
Printing, Rapid Prototyping, and Direct Digital Manufacturing, Springer, 2nd Ed. 
(2015).  
2. Chua C.K., Leong K.F. and Lim C.S., Rapid prototyping: Principles and 
applications, 3rd Edition, World Scientific, 2010. 
 
Self-learning Materials 
1. Sands, R.L. and Shakespeare C.R., Powder Metallurgy Practice and Applications, Newness 
Publications, 1970. 
2. Majumdar J.D. and Manna I., Laser -assisted fabrication of materials, Spri nger Series 
in Material Science, 2013. 
 
 
Title Plastic Deformation and Microstructure Evolution Number MT7LXX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite  
 
Objective 
1. Provide background to assess the properties and mechanisms which help in optimizing 
the plastic deformation of metals over a wide range of service conditions.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. To provide basic understanding of the reasons that make the metal exhibit variation in 
deformation and strength for metal forming and applications.  
2. Imparting knowledge in metals plastic deformation with respect to their microstructure 
evolution.  
 
Course Content  
1. Deformation behaviour: single crystal vs polycrystalline material, stress-strain curves, 
geometrically necessary dislocations. (4 lectures) 
2. Effect of microstructure on flow properties: Hall-Petch relationship, role of grain-
boundaries. (6 lectures) 
3. Strengthening mechanisms: solid solution strengthening, precipitation hardening, 
grain refinement. (10 lectures) 
4. High Temperature deformation: creep, super-plasticity, dynamic recovery, 
recrystallization and grain growth. (12 lectures) 
5. Deformation behaviour of ceramics and polymeric materials: ductile ceramics, 
plasticity in specific ceramics, dislocation activity in ceramics, non-crystalline polymer, 
crystalline polymer, structure-property relationship in polymers. (10 lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. Dieter, G. E., Mechanical Metallurgy, 3rd Edition, McGraw Hill Book Company, 1986. 
2. Courtney, T. H., Mechanical Behaviour of Materials, 2nd Edition, Waveland Pr. Inc., 
2005. 
3. Shetty, M.N., Dislocations and Mechanical Behaviour of Materials, Prentice Hall India 
Learning Private Limited, 2013. 
 
Suggested References  
1. Honeycombe, R.W.K., The Plastic Deformation of Metals, 2nd Edition, ASM, 1984. 
2. Meyers, M. A. and Chawla, K. K., Mechanical Metallurgy, Principles and Applications, 
Prentice-Hall, Inc 1984. 
 
Online Course Material  
1. Bauri, R.,  Introduction to Materials Science and Engineering, Department of 
Metallurgical & Materials Engineering,  Indian Institute of Technology, Madras, NPTEL 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113106032/       
2. Sundararaman, M., Defects in Materials, Department of Metallurgical and Materials 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Madras, NPTEL 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113106075/ 
3. Krystyn van Vliet. 3.22 Mechanical Behavior of Materials. Spring 2008. Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology: MIT OpenCourseWare, https://ocw.mit.edu. License: Creative 
Commons BY-NC-SA. 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
Title Corrosion Engineering Number MT7LXX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite  
 
Objective 
 1. Introduce the principles of corrosion and its prevention methods.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Understand the reasons for material degradation under various environments. 
2. Know the methods to minimize/prevent the loss due to corrosion. 
 
Course Content 
1. Thermodynamics and Kinetics:  Causes of corrosion, electrochemical mechanisms, 
corrosion tendency, electrode potentials, The Nernst Equation, Pourbaix Diagrams, 
Polarization and Passivation. (8 Lectures) 
2. Forms of corrosion: Galvanic corrosion, crevice corro sion, pitting corrosion, intergranular 
corrosion, selective leaching, erosion corrosion, stress corrosion, hydrogen damage. (10 
Lectures) 
3. Prevention methods: Materials selection, alteration of environment, design, cathodic and 
anodic protection, coatings. (6 Lectures) 
4. Corrosion in common metals and alloys:  Iron and steel, Copper and Copper alloys, 
Aluminum and Aluminum alloys, Magnesium and Magnesium alloys, Titanium and 
Titanium alloys.(6 Lectures) 
5. Corrosion monitoring : Destructive and Non-destructive methods (6 Lectures) 
6. High temperature oxidation:  Electrochemical and morphological aspects, oxide defect 
structure, kinetics, effects of alloying, high temperature materials. (6 Lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. Fontana, M.G., Corrosion Engineering, 3rd edition, McGraw Hill, 2017. 
2. Revie, W.R. and Uhlig, H.H., Corrosion and Corrosion Control , 4th edition, Wiley, 2008.  
 
Online Course Material 
1. Natarajan, K.A., Advances in Corrosion Engineering, IISc Bangalore, NPTEL, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113108051/ 
 
 
 
  
Title Introduction to Dislocations Number MT7LXX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite  
 
Objective 
1. Give a broad overview of dislocations and their interactions in crystals. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. The student would know the role of dislocations on properties of materials. 
 
Course Content 
1. Defects in crystals: types of defects, types of dislocations, methods for observation of 
dislocations. (4 lectures) 
2. Movement of dislocations: slip and slip plane, cross-slip and climb. (4 lectures) 
3. Elastic properties of dislocations: forces on dislocations, stress field and strain energy of 
a dislocation. (10 lectures) 
4. Dislocations in different crystals: dislocations in FCC, HCP and BCC metals, and other 
periodic systems. (10 lectures) 
5. Intersection of dislocations: Jogs, movement of dislocations containing elementary jog, 
superjogs, intersection of extended dislocations and extended jogs. (4 lectures) 
6. Multiplication of dislocations: nucleation, Frank-Reed sources, multiple cross-glide, climb 
& grain boundary. (5 lectures) 
7. Dislocation arrays and crystal boundaries: dislocation boundaries, low-angle boundaries & 
steps in interfaces. (5 lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. Hull, D. and Bacon, D. J., Introduction to Dislocations, 4th edition, Butterworth-
Heinemann, 2001. 
2. Hirth, J. P., and Lothe, J. L., Theory of Dislocations, 2nd edition, Krieger, 1982. 
 
 
 
  
Course Title Structure-Property-Correlation Number MT7LXX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite None 
 
Objective 
1. To understand the structure-property-correlation in materials. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. To design materials based on their structure for various properties. 
 
Course Content 
1. Structure sensitive properties: classification,   dimensional range of various structural 
features, interrelationship between different structural parameters, effect of structure on 
properties. (10 lectures) 
2. Dynamics of microstructure evolution:   evolution at different length scales and its effect 
on properties, factors influencing the properties, concurrent microstructure evolution and 
properties. (12 lectures) 
3. Application of structure-property correlation: influence of different service conditions, 
effect of alloys systems. (10 lectures) 
4. Computational approaches: constitutive relationship under dynamic conditions, evolution 
of concurrent structure and properties.(10 lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. Meyers, M. A., Chawla, K. K., Mechanical Metallurgy: Principles and Application, Prentice-
Hall, 1983. 
2. Mugharabi, H., Plastic Deformation and Fracture of Materials, VCH Weinheim, 1993. 
3. Krauss, G., Steels: Processing, Structure, and Performance , 2nd Edition, ASM 
International, 2005. 
 
Suggested Reference 
1. Krauss, G., Deformation, Processing, and Structure , ASM Materials Science Seminar, 
American Society for Metals, 1984. 
 
 
Title Mechanical Behavior of Materials Number MT7LXX0 
Department  Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P-D 
[C] 
3–0–2-0 [4] 
Offered for M.Tech. and Ph.D. Type Elective 
Pre-requisite  
 
Objectives 
1. To provide background on the mechanisms of deformation in engineering materials, 
and on the evolution of material microstructure when subjected to mechanical stress 
during materials processing and engineering applications 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Ability to design materials with improved mechanical properties and identify failure 
mechanisms in materials for engineering applications 
2. To measure important mechanical properties and correlate with the microstructure  
 
Contents 
Continuum Theory of Deformation:  3D-state of stress and strain, Mohr’s Circle, Generalized 
Hooke’s Law and introductory theory of elasticity, stress and strain inva riants, Yield Criteria, 
Yield surface and normality (6 lectures) 
Defects in Crystals:  Vacancies and interstitials, edge, screw and mixed dislocations, Burgers 
vector, slip, cross -slip and climb, stress fields around edge and screw dislocations, strain 
energy of dislocations, dislocation -dislocation interaction: Peach -Koehler force on 
dislocation, image forces, dislocations in different crystal structures (10 lectures) 
Twinning in Crystalline Solids: Deformation twinning, geometry of twin formation, twin sh ape, 
stress requirement for twinning, twinning in HCP, BCC, and FCC crystals (4 lectures)  
Fracture and Toughening Mechanisms Fatigue: theoretical fracture strength of a material and 
Griffith’s Law, modes of fracture, fracture toughness, G and R -curve, brittle and ductile 
fracture, toughening mechanisms in metals, ceramics, and polymers (8 lectures)  
Fatigue and Creep: Introduction to fatigue, stress and strain-life approach, cyclic stress-strain 
curve, fatigue crack propagation, high temperature deformation , fatigue-creep interaction 
(8 lectures) 
Deformation of Polymers: Elasticity in dilute and semi -dilute polymer networks, nonlinear 
elastic deformation, rubber elasticity: Mooney-Rivlin and Ogden models (6 lectures) 
Laboratory Experiments 
Measurement of uni axial monotonic stress -strain response of metals, ceramics, and 
polymers, Measurement of hardness via spherical and Vickers indentation  and correlation 
with yield strength for ductile and brittle materials,The effect of grain size on mechanical 
properties, The effects of strain rate and temperature on yield strength, Recrystallization of 
cold rolled metals, Measurement of impact fracture toughness using Charpy/Izod impact test, 
Fracture surface interpretation,  Creep of a 60%Sn-40%Pb Solder wire at room temperature. 
Text Books 
1. Dieter, G.E. (1986), Mechanical Metallurgy, 3rd Edition, McGraw-Hill Book Company. 
2. Courtney, T. H., (2005), Mechanical Behaviour of Materials, 2nd Edition, Waveland 
Press Inc. 
3. Shetty, M. N., (2013), Dislocations and Mechanical Behavior of Materials,Prentice Hall 
India Learning Private Limited 
 
Self-Learning Materials 
1. Hertzberg, R.W., (1976), Deformation and Fracture Mechanics of Engineering 
Materials, John Wiley and Sons 
2. McClintock,F.A., and Argon,A.S., (1966), Mechanical Behavior of Materials, Addison-
Wesley. 
 
 
  
Title Ceramics Number MT7LXX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite None 
 
Objective 
1. Exposure to range of ceramics and their properties based on structure. 
 
Learning Outcome 
1. Selection of ceramics for various applications. 
 
Course content 
1. Introduction to ceramics: oxide and non-oxide ceramics, their chemical formulae, crystal 
and defect structures, non-stoichiometry and typical properties. (8 Lectures) 
2. Ceramics with special properties: ductile ceramics, transparent ceramics,single crystal, 
thick and thin film ceramics, porous ceramics and ceramic membrane. (10 Lectures) 
3. Properties of ceramics: physical, chemical, mechanical, electrical and optical. (8 Lectures) 
4. Application of different types of ceramics in various industries. (8 Lectures) 
5. Exotic ceramics: functionally graded, smart/intelligent, bio-mimetic and nano-ceramics. 
(8 Lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. Norton, F.H., Elements of Ceramics, Addison-Wesley Press, 1952. 
2. Barsoum, M. and Barsoum, M.W., Fundamentals of Ceramics, CRC Press, 2002. 
3. Kingery, W.D., Bowen, H.K., and Uhlmann, D.R., Introduction to Ceramics, 2nd Ed., 1976. 
 
 
 
  
Title Composites Number MT7LXX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite None 
 
Objective 
1. To provide comprehensive background on the processing, properties, and mechanics of 
deformation of composite materials for engineering applications 
 
Learning Outcome 
1. Design and selection of composites for specific applications. 
 
Course content 
1. Introduction and classification of composites: Composites, matrix, reinforcements metal 
matrix composites, polymer matrix composites, ceramic matrix composites (6 Lectures)  
2. Manufacturing of Composite Materials:  Manufacturing techniques, Defects in 
manufactured composites (4 Lectures) 
3. Macro and micromechanics of a lamina: stress-strain relations for anisotropic and 
orthotropic materials, lamina in an arbitrary orientation, strengths of an orthotropic 
lamina, mechanics of materials approach to stiffness and strength, elasticity approach to 
stiffness (9 Lectures) 
4. Macromechanics of a laminate: stress-strain relations for a laminate, in-plane and 
flexural modulus of a laminate, strength of laminates (9 Lectures) 
5. Fracture and Toughening of Composites: fracture processes in composites, toughening 
mechanisms in fibre reinforced plastics and ceramic-matrix composites (6 Lectures) 
6. Designing of Composites: Selection of matrix and reinforcement, Wettability and role of 
interface(4 Lectures) 
7. Applications of different types of composites in various industries and Emerging trends (4 
Lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. Barbero, E.J., Introduction to Composite Materials Design, Second Edition, CRC Press, 
2011. 
2. Kar, K. K., Composite Materials: Processing, Applications, Characterizations, Springer, 
2017. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Course Title Polymers and Their Composites Number MT7LXX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite None 
 
Objective 
1. Introduce students to the wide range of polymers and their possible combinations with 
other materials for getting desired properties. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. The student will be able to apply the properties of polymers and their composites to 
construction, transport and storage industries. 
 
Course Content 
1.   Introduction: Classification and synthesis of polymers Basic definitions and nomenclature, 
molar mass and degree of polymerization, synthesis, glass transition temperature and 
crystallinity in polymers, structure and its relation to thermal, chemical, electrical and optical 
 properties. (8 Lectures) 
2.   Mechanical and thermo mechanical characteristics : General characteristics, viscoelasticity, 
deformation behavior of elastomers, deformation mechanisms, fractures, and toughened 
polymers. (8 Lectures) 
3. Polymer processing, characterization and applications :Introduction, plastics, elastomers and 
fibers, compounding and processing techniques, practical aspects of polymer blending, 
standards and engineering applications of polymers. (8 Lectures) 
4.  Polymer composites and their applications (2 Lectures) 
5.  Carbon nanomaterials and synthesis : C-C bonding, types of carbon fullerenes, crystal 
structure of selected carbon nanomaterials: CNT, graphene, nano crystalline diamond, 
synthesis by arc disch arge, thermal CVD, microwave plasma CVD, Laser ablation; growth 
mechanism; special synthesis techniques - vertical aligned growth of CNT, selective area 
growth of CNT, single walled CNT growth, large area graphene synthesis, nano-patterning on 
graphene (16 Lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. Young, R.J., and Peter A. Lovell, Introduction to Polymers , 3rd revised edition, CRC Press, 
2011. 
2. Rudin, A., The Elements of Polymer Science and Engineering , 3rd edition, Academic Press, 
2012. 
3. Koo, J.H., Polymer Nanocomposites: Processing, Characterization, and Applications , 
McGraw-Hill, 2010. 
 
Online Course Material 
1. Adhikari, B., Science and Technology of Polymers, Materials Science Centre, Indian 
Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, NPTEL, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113105028/ 
2. Garg, A., Electro Ceramics, Department of Materials science and Engineering, Indian 
Institute of Technology Kanpur, NPTEL, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113104005/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Course Title Principles of Engineering Material Selection Number MT7LXX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite  
 
Objective: 
1. Develop comprehensive knowledge on the procedure for selection of materials for 
a wide range of products in engineering applications.  
Learning Outcomes 
1. Relationship between material properties with product and component design.  
2. The methodology of materia ls selection, use of computer -aided selection and 
material data and knowledge sources and their usefulness in industry.  
 
Course Content  
1. Importance of materials : Crystal structure, bonding, processes, and mechanical 
factors in construction/design. Diffusion in materials and interpretation of phase 
diagrams. (6 Lectures) 
2. Selection of materials for a specific application depending on the property and 
performance us ing CES Selector for materials selection : A generalized material 
selection strategy will be introduced together with use of material property charts, 
computer-aided selection, and case studies. (8 Lectures) 
3. Finding and understanding structured information on materials and processes for 
material selection : How to screen information on materials and arrive at a 
conclusion? How to create hybrid materials with combined properties of two or 
three materials? (10 Lectures) 
4. Component/structural failures: Fracture, fatigue, creep, embrittlement, corrosion, 
etc. Detailed survey of typical real life examples of failures from different 
applications – lectures and videos. (10 Lectures) 
5. Applications in technological sectors: Bio-medical, building, high temperature, 
industrial applications, micro -electronics, packaging, transportation, etc. (8 
Lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. Ashby, M.F., Materials Selection in Mechanical Design , 4 th Edition, Butterworth -
Heinemann, 2010. 
2. Callister, W. D., Materials Science and Engineering- An Introduction, John Wiley & 
Sons, 1985. 
 
Suggested References 
1. Shackelford, J. F., Introduction to Materials Science for Engineers , Mac Millan 
Publishing, 1992. 
2. Cottrell, A., An Introduction to Metallurgy, Universities Press, 2000. 
3. Smith, W. F., Materials Science and Engineering , 4 thEdition, Tata McGraw Hill , 
2008. 
4. Van Vlack, L. H., Elements of Material Science and Engineering , 6 th Edition, 
Pearson Education, 2006. 
 
Online Course Material 
1. Granta Design, CES EduPack Software, 2016. 