Source: http://intra.iitj.ac.in/acad_website/pg_curriculum/MSC%20MATHEMATICS_06092019.pdf
================================================================================

1 
 
 
Indian Institute of Technology 
Jodhpur 
 
   
 
 
 
 
PG Course Booklet 
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur 
July 2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Master of Science (MSc) Program  
in  
Mathematics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
(1) Introduction: 
The classical mathematics provides foundations for analysis of key principles behind 
modern and emergent technologies, modern mathematics coupled with computational 
capabilities is opening new avenues for further explorations. M.Sc. (Mathematics) 
Program at IIT Jodhpur aims at tapping these opportunities by developing workforce 
specialized in mathematics needed for developing key technologies. The propos ed four 
semester program strives to provide balance between analysis and application of 
Mathematics. The compulsory courses provide the basic understanding and foundation of 
mathematics enhancing analytic capabilities of the students. Students can further 
explore their area of interest with program and open elective courses. The project 
component spread over last two semesters provides research exposure to the students 
and provides an opportunity to apply their mathematical skills to solve real -life 
problems. Students are encouraged to undertake research Summer Internships in 
Institute of repute, Industry and R&D organizations. 
 
(2) Objectives of the Program: 
M.Sc. program in Mathematics at IIT Jodhpur is offered with the objective of tapping 
opportunities f or nurturing motivated students in the frontline areas and well trained 
workforce for Academia and Industry. The Program also strives to provide a vibrant 
environment to support independent thinking and developing the spirit of team work. 
 
(3) Expected Graduate Attributes: 
(1) Skill set to analyze abstract mathematical structures. 
(2) Understanding about the recent areas in pure and applied mathematics such as 
algebra, analysis, statistics and computation. 
(3) Ability to formulate mathematics from computational aspect.  
(4) Knowledge and capability to develop and apply mathematical models for real life 
problems. 
(5) Skill set to understand the abstraction of mathematical structures. 
(6) Analytical and scientific skill set t o pursue higher studies and research in diverse 
areas of mathematics. 
(7) Ability to express ideas in the written and oral formats. 
 
(4) Learning Outcomes: 
(1) Understanding of fundamental aspects of real, complex and functional analysis. 
(2) Basic understanding of linear and abstract algebra. 
(3) Knowledge about basics and use of probability theory, statistics and differential 
equations. 
(4) Skill set to cater computational aspects using programming techniques. 
(5) Basic understanding of symbolic solution tools such as MATLAB or Mathematica. 
(6) Demonstrate skills to communicate scientific ideas and/or application systems.  
4 
 
(7) Acquire project management skills. 
(5) Program Structure: 
 
Cat. Course 
Number 
Course Title L-T-P-
D 
Credits  Cat. Course 
Number 
Course Title L-T-P-
D 
Credits 
Semester 1  Semester 2 
C MAL6XX0 Linear 
algebra 
3-0-0-
1 
4  C MAL6XX0 Abstract 
Algebra 
3-0-0-1 4 
C MAL6XX0 Real analysis 3-0-0-
1 
4  C MAL5XX0 Complex  
Analysis 
3-0-0-1 4 
C MAL6XX0 Ordinary 
Differential 
equations 
3-0-0-
1 
4  C MAL6XX0 Partial 
Differential 
equations 
3-0-0-0 3 
C MAL5XX0 Probability 
and 
Statistics 
3-0-0-
1 
4  C MAL6XX0 Functional 
analysis 
3-0-0-0 3 
C MAL5XX0 Programming 
Techniques 
2-0-2-
0 
3  PE Xxxxx PE1 3-0-0-0 3 
      C MA5XX0 Data 
Structures and 
Algorithms 
1-0-2-0 2 
Total 19  Total 19 
 
Semester 3  Semester 4 
C MAL6XX0 Topology 3-0-0-
0 
3  PE Xxxxx PE5 3-0-0-0 3 
PE Xxxxx PE2 3-0-0-
0 
3  PE Xxxxx PE6 3-0-0-0 3 
PE Xxxxx PE3 3-0-0-
0 
3  OE Xxxxx OE2 3-0-0-0 3 
PE Xxxxx PE4 3-0-0-
0 
3       
OE Xxxxx OE1 3-0-0-
0 
3       
P MAP7XX0   Project 0-0-0-
5 
5  P MAP7XX0   Project 0-0-
0-10 
10 
Total 20  Total 19 
Grand total 77 
 
S.No. Category Course 
Category Title 
Total 
Courses 
Total 
Credits 
1 C Compulsory 11 38 
2 PE Program Electives 6 18 
3 OE Open Elective 2 6 
4 P Project 2 15 
Total  77 
 
 
 
(6) Topic Cloud 
Compulsory Topics: 
(a) Linear Algebra (Finite dimensional Vector Spaces, linear transformations, Inner 
Product Spaces, Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors, Jordan canonical forms, Matrix 
theory, Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors, Spectral Analysis) 
5 
 
(b) Real Analysis (Basic properties of real system, study of Metric spaces, Calculus of 
several variables, Function spaces), Abstract Algebra (Basic algebraic structures, 
group theory, ring theory, Galois Theory) 
(c) Topology (Topological structures and their propertie s, transformation between 
topological spaces), Functional Analysis (Normed linear spaces, Banach spaces, Lp 
Spaces, Hilbert Spaces, Linear transformations and their properties) 
(d) Complex Analysis (Fundamental theorem of Complex Analysis, Residue theorem, 
Contour integration and its applications, evaluation of Improper integrals, conformal 
mappings) 
(e) Probability theory (Univariate and multi -variate Probability Distributions and their 
properties, weak laws of large numbers, central limit theorem). 
(f) Statistics (sa mpling distributions, estimation of parameters, interval estimation, 
testing of hypotheses), Statistical modelling (Estimation of parameters, Interval 
estimation, Testing of hypotheses) 
(g) Ordinary Differential Equations (Existence and Uniqueness of solution,  Sturm-
Liouville problems and properties of its solutions) 
(h) Partial differential equations and their applications 
(i) Fundamentals of Programming 
(j) Numerical Techniques (Root finding methods, Solution for system of linear 
equations, Power method), Solution to Sys tem of linear Equations, Interpolation, 
Numerical solution of Ordinary Differential Equations. 
 
Elective Topics: 
Fourier analysis, Wavelets analysis, Dynamical Systems, Operations Research, Number 
Theory, Calculus of Variations, Integral Equations, Statistical Inference, Graphs Theory, 
Stochastic Calculus, Measure and Integration, Chaos Theory, Numerical Methods for 
Partial Differential Equations, Discrete Mathematics. 
 
 
 
(7) List of Electives 
 
(a) Department of Mathematics 
 MAL7XX0: Measure and Integration 
 MAL7XX0: Financial Engineering 
 MAL7XX0: Wavelets analysis and Applications   
 MAL7XX0: Dynamical Systems 
 MAL7XX0: Optimization 
 MAL7XX0: Numerical Analysis 
 MAL7XX0: Number Theory 
 MAL7XX0: Statistical Inference 
 MAL7XX0: Graph Theory 
 MAL7XX0: Calculus of Variation and Integral Equations 
 MAL7XX0: Stochastic Calculus  
 MAL7XX0: Algebraic Number Theory 
 MAL7XX0: Machine Learning and Pattern Recognition 
 MAL7XX0: Chaos Theory and its Applications 
 MAL7XX0: Representations of finite groups 
 MAL8XX0: Numerical Partial Differential Equations 
 MAL7XX0: Selected Topics in Mathematics - I (1-0-0-0) 
 MAL7XX0: Selected Topics in Mathematics - II (2-0-0-0) 
 MAL7XX0: Selected Topics in Mathematics - III (3-0-0-0) 
6 
 
 
(b) From sister Departments 
 Theory of Vibrations 
 Finite Element Methods in Engineering 
 Incompressible Fluid Flow 
 Computer Graphics 
 Advanced Computer Graphics 
 Digital Image Analysis 
 Statistical Signal Analysis 
 Statistical Decision Theory 
 Computational Imaging 
 Multimedia Communication 
 Classical Mechanics 
 Quantum Mechanics 
 Statistical Physics 
 Introduction to Quantum Technologies 
  
7 
 
(8) Content of compulsory courses: 
 
Course Title Linear Algebra Course No. MAL6XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-1[4] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
1. To give sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by students for 
further applications in their respective domains of interest. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Concept of linear spaces, mapping between spaces, norm and their action on 
spaces. 
2. Eigenvalues, eigenvectors and diagonalization, and Primary decomposition 
theorem. 
3. Normal operators and Spectral theory of real symmetric normal operators. 
 
Contents 
Vector Spaces, Matrices and System of Linear Equations [10 Lectures] : System of 
linear equations,Matrices and rank, Vector Spaces over fields, Subspaces, Bases and 
dimension, Direct sum of the sub spaces. 
 
Linear Transformation and Inner Product Spaces [10 Lectures] : Linear 
Transformations, Rank and Nullity theorem, Representation of linear transformations 
by matrices, duality and transpose. Inner product spaces, Gram -Schmidt 
orthonormalization, orthogonal projections. 
 
Operators and Spectral Theorem [20 Lectures] :Linear functionals and adjoints, 
Hermitian, self -adjoint, Unitary and normal op erators, Spectral theorem for real 
operators, Eigenvalues, Eigenvectors, Characteristic polynomials, minimal polynomials, 
Cayley Hamilton Theorem, triangulation, diagonalization, Jordan canonical forms 
(without proof). 
 
Textbook  
1. Hoffman, K., and Kunze R., Linear Algebra,  Pearson Education (India) 2003. 
2. Herstein, I.N., Topics in Algebra, 2nd Edn., John Wiley and Sons. 
3. Lax, P., Linear Algebra and its applications, John Wiley & Sons, Indian Edition 1997 
4. Lang, S., Linear Algebra, 3rd Edition, Springer, 2004. 
 
Reference Books  
1. Artin, M., Algebra, Prentice Hall of India, 1994. 
2. Axler, S., (1997), Linear Algebra Done Right. 
3. Kumaresan, S., (2000) Linear Algebra – A Geometric Approach, PHI Learning. 
4. Sharma, R. K., Shah, S. K. and Shankar, A. G., Algebra I: A Basic Course in 
Algebra, Pearson Education, 2011. 
 
Online course Material  
1. Rana, I.K., Basic Linear Algebra, NPTEL Course material, Department of 
Mathematics, IIT Bombay,  https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111101115/ 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Course Title Real Analysis Course No. MAL6XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-1[4] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
1. To train the student in the area of real analysis 
2. To give sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by student for 
further applications in their respective domains of interest 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Metric spaces, completeness and Baire Category. 
2. Continuity, Uniform continuity, Contraction mapping, fixed point theorem.  
3. Connectedness and Compactness and Heine-Borel theorem. 
4. Function spaces, Weiestrass approximation theorem. 
 
Contents 
Real Number System, Limits and Continuity  [10 Lectures]:  Countable and uncountable 
sets, the axiom of choice, Zorn’s lemma, Real number system, Consequences of 
completeness property, limit and continuity of functions, uniform continuity.   
Metric Spaces [10 Lectures] : Metric spaces, continuous and uniformly continuous 
functions, bounded and totally bounded sets, Compactness, Heine -Borel Theorem, 
Completeness, Cantor’s Intersection theorem, Baire spaces, Connectedness.  
Sequences and Series of Functions: [10 Lectures] Sequences and Series of functions, 
Uniform convergence, Uniform convergence and integration, Uniform convergence and 
differentiation,  
Multivariable Calculus [10 Lectures] : Functions of several variables, continuity, 
differentiability, partial derivatives, Jacobian, Inverse Function Theorem and the Implicit 
Function Theorem, multivariable integration, Fubini’s theorem, Change of variables, Line 
integrals, surface integrals, Green’s theorem, Divergence theorem, Stokes theorem, and 
applications. 
 
Textbook 
1. Aliprantis, C.D., and Burkinshaw, O., Principles of Real Analysis, 3rd Edition. 
2. Apostol, T., Mathematical Analysis, 2nd Edition, Narosa, 2002. 
3. Ghorpade, S.R., and Limaye, B.V., A Course in Multivariable Calculus and Analysis, 
Springer. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Royden, H. L., Real Analysis, Third Edition, Macmillan Publishing Company, 1988. 
2. Rudin, W., Priciples of Mathematical Analysis, Third Edition, McGraw-Hill, 1976. 
3. Davidson, K. R., and Donsig, A. P., Real analysis and applications: Theory in 
practice, Springer Publications, 2010. 
4. Bartle, R., Sherbert, D., Introduction to Real Analysis, 3rd Edition, Wiley 2011. 
 
Online course Material  
1. Kulkarni, S.H., Real Analysis, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mathematics, 
IIT Madras,  https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111106053/ 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
Course Title Ordinary Differential Equations Course No. MAL6XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-1[4] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
1. Introduce the concepts of existence and uniqueness of solution of ordinary 
differential equations 
2. Develop analytical techniques to solve ordinary differential equations 
3. Understand the properties of solution of ordinary differential equations 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Understanding existence, uniqueness, and other properties of a solution of 
ordinary differential equations 
2. Solving ordinary differential equations with series method, Green's function 
method 
3. Solving systems of ODEs, and characterization of their solutions 
 
Contents 
Motivations and origins, Existence-Uniqueness [7 Lectures]: Existence of solutions by 
Picard’s method, uniqueness and continuous dependence w.r.t. initial conditions and 
parameters, continuation of solutions, existence  and uniqueness of solutions to 
system of differential equations. 
 
Second Order Linear Equations [23 Lectures] : General solution of differential 
equations using method of undetermined coefficients, method of variation of 
parameters, variable coefficients equations, Power series solution method, Legendre’s 
equation, Frobenius method, Bessel’s equation, Green's function method, Sturm -
Liouville problems, orthogonal eigen -function expansions, Sturm comparison theorem, 
Sturm separation theorem, 
 
Systems of Differential Equations [10 Lectures]: Phase plane method, critical points of 
the system and their stability analysis, algebraic properties of solutions, the 
eigenvalue-eigenvector method of finding solutions, fundamental matrix solutions,  
matrix exponential, nonhomogeneous equations. 
 
Text Books 
1. Ross, S. L., Introduction to ordinary differential equations, 4th Ed., John Wiley 
Publications, 1989 
2. Braun. M., Differential Equations and Their Applications, 3rd  Ed., Springer-Verlag, 
1983 
3. Chicone, C., Ordinary Differential Equations with Applications, 2nd  Ed., Springer, 
2006 
 
Reference Books 
1. Coddington, E. A., An Introduction to Ordinary Differential Equations, PHI 
Learning 1999 
2. Birkhoff, G. and Rota G., Ordinary Differential Equations, 4th Ed., Wiley 
Publications, 1989 
3. Simmons, G., Differential Equations with Applications and Historical Notes, 2nd 
Ed., McGraw Hill Education, 2017 
 
Online Course Material 
1. Agrawal, P. N. and Pandey, D. N., Ordinary and partial differential equations and 
applications, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mathematics, IITRoorkee, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107111/ 
10 
 
2. Raghavendra V., Ordinary differential equations, NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Mathematics, IIT Kanpur,https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111104031/ 
 
 
 
  
11 
 
Course Title Probability and Statistics Course No. MAL5XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-1[4] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
1. Demonstrate an understanding of the basic principles of probability theory. 
2. Use of the properties of discrete and continuous random variables with their 
joint, marginal, and conditional distributions. 
3. Use of the various families of probability distributions to model various types of 
data. 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Understanding of probability theory and statistics to solve industrial problems. 
2. Understanding of random sampling, theory of estimation and testing of 
hypotheses. 
 
Contents: 
Probability spaces and Random Variables [15 lectures] : Probability measure, 
conditional probability, Bayes’ theorem, Random variable, cumulative distribution 
function and its properties, probability density function, functions of a random 
variable, standard discrete and continuous distributions and their applications, 
Transformation, moments, Chebychev’s inequality. 
Joint Distributions [10 lectures] : Random vectors, joint, marginal and conditional 
distributions, conditional expectatio n, independence, correlation and regression, Bi -
variate normal distribution, functions of random vectors, transformation. 
Limit Theorems[3 lectures]: Convergence of sequences of random variables, weak and 
strong laws of large numbers, central limit theorems. 
Estimation and Tests of Hypotheses[14 lectures]: Sampling distributions, estimation of 
parameters, maximum likelihood method and method of moments, interval estimation, 
testing of hypotheses. 
 
Text Books 
1. Rohatgi, V. K., and Saleh, A. K. M. E., An Introduction to Probability and 
Statistics, Second Edition, Wiley India, 2000. 
2. Casella, G. and Berger, R. (2002). Statistical Inference, Cengage Learning. 
3. Hoel, P.G., Port, S.C. and Stone, C.J. (1971). Introduction to Probability Theory, 
Houghton Mifflin Series in Statistics. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Hogg, R. V., McKean J. W., and Craig A., Introduction to Mathematical Statistics, 
Sixth Edition, Pearson Education India, 2006. 
2. Prakasa Rao, B. L., S., A First Course in Probability and Statistics, World 
Scientific/Cambridge University Press India, 2009. 
3. Castaneda, L. B., Arunachalam, V., and Dharmaraja, S., Introduction to 
probability and stochastic processes with Applications. Wiley, 2012 
 
Online Course Material: 
1. Kumar, S., Probability and Statistics, NP TEL Course Material, Department of 
Mathematics, IIT Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111105090/ 
 
 
 
 
12 
 
Title Programing techniques Number MAL5XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 2–0–2-0 
[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. introduce the basics of computer programming in C/C++. 
2. Teach to develop well-structured programs in C/C++. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Write well structures programs in C/C++. 
2. Implement and solve algebraic and transcendental equations and system of 
equations numerically. 
Contents  
 
 
  
Introduction[2 Lectures]:machine language, assembly language, high-level programming 
languages, compiler, interpreter, loader, linker, and flowchart. 
 
Basic features of programming (Using C/C++) [8 Lectures] :Data types, variables, 
operators, expressions, control structures, functions, parameter passing conventions.  
 
Advanced features of pr ogramming [8 Lectures] : Pointers, arrays, operations on data 
(Insert, delete, search, traverse and modify), structures, introduction to classes. 
 
Root finding methods [4 Lectures] : Bisection method, Secant method, the method of 
false position, Newton-Raphson method. 
 
Solution of system of linear equations [6 Lectures] : Gauss elimination, Gauss -Jordan 
method, LU decomposition, Crout's Method, Do -little Method, and Cholesky 
decomposition. 
 
Textbooks  
1. Balaguruswamy, E., Programming in ANSI C, Tata McGraw-Hill, 2004. 
2. Lafore, R., Object-Oriented  Programming in C++, Fourth Edition, Pearson, 2002. 
3. Burden,  R. L., Numerical Analysis, Ninth Edition, Cengage Learning India, 2012. 
Reference Books  
1. Schildt, H., C: The Complete Reference, Fourth Edition, Tata McGraw Hill, 2000. 
2. Datta,  B. N., Numerical Linear Algebra and Applications, 2nd Edition, PHI, 2010. 
Online Course Material  
1. Kumar, S.A., Principles of Programming Languages, NPT EL Course Material, 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Delhi, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106102067/.   
2. Gupta, D., Introduction to Problem Solving and Programming, NPTEL Course 
Material, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Kanpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106104074/. 
3. Nayak,  A. K. and Kumar S., Numerical methods, NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Mathematics, IIT Roorkee, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107105/. 
 
 
 
13 
 
Course Title Abstract Algebra Course No. MAL6XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-1[4] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
1. To train the student in the domain of Abstract Algebra. 
2. To give sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by student for 
further applications in their respective domains of interest.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Modules, Dual modules, Cyclic Primary modules and Decomposition theorem. 
2. Nilpotent and Solvable groups, Galois Theory, splitting Fields, Normal extension, 
Fundamental theorem of Galois theory  
 
Contents: 
 
Group Theory [10 lectures]:  Review of Group theory (Symmetric Groups, 
Transformation Groups), Abelian groups, Sylow Theorems, nilpotent and solvable 
groups. 
 
Ring Theory [11 lectures] : Rings, Polynomial Rings, Prime ideals, Maximal Ideals, 
Principal Ideal Domain, Unique Factorization domain, Euclidian Algorithm.  
 
Field extensions [5 lectures]: Finite extension, algebraic extensions. 
 
Galois Theory [16 lectures] : Galois Theory, splitting Fields, Normal extension, 
Fundamental Theorem of Galois Theory and its applications. 
 
 
Text Book 
1. Cohn, P. M., Basic algebra: Groups, rings and fields, 2 Ed., Springer, 2005 
2. Jacobson, N., Basic Algebra I, Dover Publication, 2009 
3. Jacobson, N., Basic Algebra II, Dover Publication, 2012 
 
Reference Books 
1. Artin, M., Algebra, Second Edition, Pearson, 2010 
4. Dummit, D. S. and Foote, R. M., Abstract algebra, 3 Ed., Wiley, 2004 
5. Stewart, I., Galois Theory, Third Edition, Chapman and Hall, 2003 
 
Online Course Material: 
1. Gross, B., Abstract Algebra, Online Course Material, Harvard Extension School, 
http://matterhorn.dce.harvard.edu/engage/ui/index.html#/1999/01/82345 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14 
 
Course Title Complex Analysis Course No. MAL5XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-1[4] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
1. To train the student in the area of complex analysis. 
2. To give sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by student for 
further applications in their respective domains of interest. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Cauchy-Riemann Equations, Homotopy of paths. 
2. Cauchy-Goursat theorem and Cauchy’s Integral Formula. 
3. Evaluation of improper integrals. 
 
Contents 
 
Introduction to functions of complex variables  [14 Lectures] : Elementary functions, 
continuity, differentiability, Analytic Functions, Cauchy Riemann Equations. 
 
Complex Integration [14 Lectures] : Line and Contour Integrals, anti -derivatives of a 
complex function, Cauchy-Goursat Theorem, Simply and multiply connected domains, 
Cauchy’s Integral formula, Taylor and Laurent Series expansion, Liouville’s Theorem, 
Fundamental Theorem of Algebra, Maximum modulus principle. 
 
Residue Theory[10 Lectures] Residues and poles, Cauchy’s residue theorem, Jordan’s 
Theorem, evaluation of Improper integrals 
 
Conformal mappings [4 Lectures] : Conformal mapping, Special transformation, 
Mobious transformation. 
 
Text Books 
1. Lang, S., Complex Analysis, Fourth Edition, Springer-Verlag, 1999 
2. Brown, J. W. and Churchill, R. V., Complex variables and applications, 9 Ed., 
McGraw Hill Publications, 2013 
 
Reference Books 
1. Ahlfors, L.V., Complex Analysis, 3rd edition, McGraw Hill, 2000. 
2. Ablowitz, M. J., and Fokas, A. S., Complex variables: Introduction and 
applications, 2 Ed., Cambridge University Press, 2003. 
3. Shastri, A.R., An Introduction to Complex Analysis, Macmillan India, New Delhi, 
1999. 
 
Online Resources 
1. Sree Krishna, P.A.S., Complex Analysis, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Mathematics, IIT Guwahati,  https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111103070/ 
2. Swaminathan, A. and Katiyar, V.K. Complex Analysis, NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Mathematics, IIT Roorkee,  
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107056/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
Course Title Partial Differential 
Equations 
Course No. MAL6XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
1. Introduce the concepts of existence and uniqueness of solution of partial differential 
equations 
2. Develop analytical techniques to solve partial differential equations 
3. Understand the properties of solution of partial differential equations 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Understanding existence, uniqueness, and other properties of a solution of partial 
differential equations 
2. Solving partial differential equations with Fourier series method, Green's function 
method,  Laplace transform method, and Fourier transform method 
 
Contents 
 
Motivations and origins [3 Lectures]:  PDEs of engineering and physics (Heat, wave and 
Laplace equations). 
 
First order partial differential equations [9 Lectures] : Linear, quasi -linear and fully 
nonlinear equations, Lagrange method, the Cauchy p roblem, Cauchy method of 
characteristics, compatible systems, Charpit method.  
 
Second order partial differential equations [12 Lectures] : Classification and Canonical 
forms, Adjoint operators, Riemann’s method, solving linear partial differential equation s 
with constant coefficients. 
 
Elliptic, parabolic and hyperbolic equations[16 Lectures]: Variable separation method for 
Laplace/Poisson equation, heat conduction equation, wave equation, Burger equation,  
D’Alembert’s solution,  Maximum -Minimum principles, Duhamel’s principle, solutions by 
Green’s function method. 
 
Text Books 
1. Rao, K. S., Introduction to partial differential equations, 3rd Edition, PHI, 2011 
2. Logan, J. D., Applied partial differential equations, 3rd  Ed., Springer, 2015 
3. Pinchover, Y. and Rubinstein, J., An introduction to partial differential equations, 
Cambridge University Press, 2005 
 
Reference Books 
1. Sneddon, I. N., Elements of Partial Differential Equations, McGraw-Hill, New 
York,1986 
2. Prasad, P. And Ravindran, R.,  Partial differential equations, New Age 
International Publisher, 2005 
3. Mattheij, R. M. M., Rienstra, S. W., and ten Thije Boonkkamp, J. H. M., Partial 
Differential Equations: Modeling, Analysis, Computation, SIAM Publication, 2005 
 
Online Course Material  
1. Agrawal, P. N. and Pandey D.N., Ordinary and partial differential equations and 
applications, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mathematics, IIT Roorkee, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107111/ 
2. Sinha, R. K., Partial differential equations, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Mathematics, IIT Guwahati, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111103021/ 
16 
 
Title Functional Analysis Number MAL6XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 
[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
1. To introduce the area of Functional analysis. 
2. To give sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by student for further 
applications in their respective domains of interest. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. Basic idea of a normed linear spaces and operators on normed linear space. 
2. Open Mapping theorem, Hahn-Banach Theorem and their applications. 
 
Contents  
Normed Linear Spaces [14 Lectures]: Normed linear space, subspace of a normed linear 
space, Equivalent norms, Finite Dimensional normed linear spaces, Banach spaces, 
Linear operator, norm of a linear operator, boundedness and continuity, Quotient spaces.  
 
Integrability and Extensi on Theorems [19 Lectures] : Integrable functions, l_p spaces, 
Minkowski's inequality, Holder's inequality, separability of l_p spaces, uniformly bounded 
operator, principle of uniform boundedness, Sub -linear functional, Semi -norm, Open 
mapping theorem, Close d graph theorem, Hahn -Banach Theorem, dual of a normed 
linear space, reflexive normed linear space. 
 
Hilbert Spaces and their Applications [9 Lectures]: Inner product spaces, polarisation 
identity, Bessel's inequality, Hilbert space, Riesz representation theorem, Operators on 
Hilbert spaces, compact operators, projections and idempotents.  
 
Text Books  
1. Limaye, B. V., Functional Analysis, Second Edition, New Age International, 1996 
2. Lax, P. D., Functional Analysis, First Edition, 2001 
3. Ruddin, W., Functional Analysis, 2nd Ed., McGraw Hill Education, 2017 
 
Reference Books  
1. Conway, J. B., A course in Functional Analysis, Second Edition, Springer -Verlag, 
1994 
2. Goffman, C., and Pedrick, G., A First Course in Functional Analysis, Prentice -Hall, 
1974 
 
Online Course Material  
1. Srivastava, P. D., Functional Analysis,  NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Mathematics, IIT Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/111105037/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17 
 
Course Title Data Structures and Algorithms Course No. MAP5XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 1–0–2-0 [2] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
1. To provide sufficient skills to prove and analyze efficiency of the algorithms.  
2. To introduce elementary data structures and related operations. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Ability to design correct programs to solve problems.  
2. Skills to choose efficient data structures and apply them to solve problems. 
3.  Ability to show the correctness and efficiency of a program. 
 
 
Contents 
 
Performance of algorithms [3 lectures] : Algorithm Development, Complexity analysis 
and asymptotics.  
 
Data structures [11 lectures] : Arrays, pointers, linked lists, stacks, queues, binary 
trees, tree traversals.  
 
A programming laboratory will be set in consonance with the topics covered in 
lectures. This will include assignments in a programming language like C and C++ in 
GNU Linux environment. 
 
 
Text Books 
1. Cormen, T.H., Leiserson, C.E., Rivest, R.L. and Stein, C., Introduction to 
Algorithms, 2nd Ed.,Prentice-Hall of India, 2007. 
2. Sahni, S., Data Structures, Algorithms and Applications in C++, 2nd Ed., 
Universities Press, 2005. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Aho, A. V., Ullman, J. D., and Hopcroft, J. E. (1985), Data Structures and 
Algorithms, Addison-Wesley.  
2. Goodrich, M.T. and Tamassia, R., Data Structures and Algorithms in Java, Wiley, 
2006. 
 
Online course material 
1. Garg, N., Data Structures And Algorithms, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Delhi, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106102064/. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18 
 
Title Topology Number MAL6XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 
[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
1. To train the students in the domain of Topology. 
2. To give sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by student for further 
applications in their respective domains of interest. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. Topological spaces, order topology and product topology. 
2. Separation axioms, countability axioms Urysohn’s metrization theorem. 
3. Function spaces, pointwise and uniform convergence, Stone-Weierstrass Theorem.  
 
Contents  
 
Basic Topology [14 Lectures]: Topological spaces, basis and sub -basis, order topology, 
product topology, subspace topology, convergence, closed sets, continuous functions, 
quotient topology  
 
Properties of Topological Spaces [17 Lectures]: Connected spaces, Components, local 
connectedness, compact spaces, limit point compactness, local compactness, 
Countability axioms, separation axioms, normal spaces, Tychonoff spaces, Urysohn’s 
metrization theorem, Tietze extension theorem, Tychonoff theorem, Stone-Cech 
compactification 
 
Special Topi cs [09 Lectures] : Function spaces, pointwise and uniform convergence, 
compact-open topology, uniform convergence on compact set, Stone -Weierstrass 
Theorem. 
 
 
Text Books  
1. Munkres, J., Topology, second edition, Pearson Publications, 2000 
2. Willard, S., General Topology, Dover Publications, 2004 
 
Reference Books  
1. Pervin, W. J. and Boas, R. P., Foundations of general topology, Academic Press, 
1964 
2. Simmons, G. F., Introdunction to topology and modern analysis, Tata McGraw -
Hill, 2004 
 
Online Course Material  
1. Veeramani, P., Topology, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mathematics, IIT  
Madras, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111106054/. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19 
 
(9) Content of Elective courses: 
 
Title Measure and Integration Number MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D 
[C] 
3–0–0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
1. Provide background in the area of Measure Theory. 
2. Provide sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by students for 
further applications in their respective domains of interest. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
1.  Provide basic understanding of the measures, total variation, absolute continuity, 
and Radon-Nikodym Theorem. 
2.  Impart knowledge in Derivatives of measures, Fundamental Theorem, product 
measures, Fubini’s Theorem, convolutions, Distribution functions. 
 
Contents  
 
Basics of Measure and Integration [12 Lectures] : Riemann Integration and need for 
generalization, Measurable Sets, measurable functions, functions between measurable 
spaces, Measures on Algebra of Sets, Extension Theorems, Lebesgue and Lebesgue -
Stieltjes measure, Measure, measure spaces. 
 
Integrability [14 Lectures] : Simple functions and their integrals, integral of a non -
negative measurable function, integral of extended real valued non -negative function, 
Monotone Convergence Theorem, Fatou’s lemma, Integrable functions, Lebesgue 
Dominated Convergence T heorem, Lebesgue Spaces L_p, Holder’s Inequality, 
Minkowski’s Inequality, completeness theorem, L_{\infinity}. 
 
Modes of convergence [6 Lectures] : Relations between convergence almost 
everywhere, convergence in measure and convergence in L_p spaces, Egorof f’s 
Theorem. 
 
Special Theorems (without proof) [14 Lectures]: Hahn Decomposition Theorem, Jordan 
Decomposition Theorem, Radon -Nikodym Theorem, Lebesgue Decomposition 
Theorem, Riesz Representation Theorem for L_p spaces. 
 
Textbook  
1. Royden, H.L., (1988), Real analysis, 3 rd Edition, Macmillan Publishing Company, 
New York 
2. Bartle,R.G., (2014), The Elements of Integration and Lebesgue Measure, John 
Wiley & Sons 
3.  Inder K.Rana, (2007), An Introduction to Measure and Integration, Narosa. 
 
Reference Books  
1. Parthasarathy, K.R., 2005, Introduction to Probability and Measure, TRIM Series, 
Vol. 33, Hindustan book agency, New Delhi. 
2. Halmos, P.R., 1976, Measure Theory, 1st Edition, Springer. 
  
Online Course Material  
1. Rana, I.K., Measure Theory, NPTEL Course Mat erial, Department of Mathematics, 
IIT Bombay, https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc17_ma15/ 
20 
 
 
Title Financial Engineering Number MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA) Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
1. Securities Pricing Securities, Risk Management Assessment, prediction and decision 
making, under uncertainty, regarding future events and their consequences 
2. Portfolio Optimization Balancing risk and return 
3. Modeling Pricing of derivatives and Itos calculus 
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. Valuation of financial portfolio 
2. Pricing of financial derivatives (options and contracts) 
3. Understanding risk and return 
 
Contents  
 
[18 lectures]: Introduction to financial markets and financial instruments, financial 
derivatives, risk and return, risky and risk free assets, interest rates, bonds, bonds pricing, 
spot and forward rates, investment portfolio, mean -variance analysis, capital asset prici ng 
model, arbitrage pricing theory. 
 
[22 lectures]: Discrete time models, stock and money market models, principle of no 
arbitrage, pricing of contracts (forward and future), options, put -call parity, option pricing, 
martingales, Binomial model, CRR model, Black-Scholes formula, Greeks, random walk, 
Brownian motion, stochastic process, Itos integral and Ito-Deoblins formula. 
 
Textbook  
1. M. Capinski and T. Zastawniak, Mathematics for finance: an introduction to financial 
engineering, Springer, 2010.  
2. S.N. Neftci, Principles of financial engineering. Academic Press/Elsevier, 2009. 
 
Reference Books  
1. J.C. Hull, Options, futures and other derivatives. Pearson India, 2011. 
2. S.E. Shreve, Stochastic calculus for finance I: The binomial asset pricing model, 
Springer, 2000. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21 
 
 
Course Title Wavelet Analysis and Applications Course No. MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/PhD (MA) Type Elective 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
1. To introduce the origin of wavelet transform 
2. To develop the understanding of multiresolution analysis for different types of 
signals 
3. To equip the students with various possible applications of the wavelet transform 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Strong understanding of Fourier and wavelet transform. 
2. Answer to the question why wavelet transform is a better tool for signal analysis. 
3. Implement and apply wavelet transform for various applications. 
 
Contents 
Fourier Analysis [12 Lectures] : Fourier and inverse Fourier transforms, Gabor 
transform, short time Fourier transform and the uncertainty principle. 
 
Wavelet Analysis [18 Lectures] : Mother wavelet, orthogonal and biorthogonal 
wavelets, continuous and discrete wavelet transform, basic properties of wavelet 
transforms, multiresolution analysis, Haar wavelet transform, Dabuchies Wavelet 
Transform, wave-packet transform 
 
Applications [12 Lectures]: Application of wavelet theory to feature detection, image 
denoising and compression. 
 
Text Books 
1. Chui, C. K., An Introduction to Wavelets, Academic Press Inc., New York, 1992. 
2. Debnath, L., Wavelet Transforms and Their Applications, Birkhauser, 2002. 
3. Mallat, S., A Wavelet Tour of Signal Processing, Academic Press, 1999. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Daubechies, I., Ten Lectures on Wavelets, Society for Industrial and Applied 
Mathematics, Philadelphia, PA, 1992 
2. Akansu, A.N.,  and Haddad, R.A.,  Multiresolution  signal Decomposition: 
Transforms, Subbands and Wavelets, Academic Press, Oranld, Florida, 1992 
3. Kaiser, G., A Friendly Guide to Wavelets, Birkhauser, New York, 1995. 
 
Online course Material  
1. Gadre, V.M., Fundamentals of Wavelets, Filter Banks and Time Frequency 
Analysis, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mathematics, IIT Bombay, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108101093/. 
2. Strang, G. and Amaratunga, K., Wavelets, Filter Banks and Applications, Online 
Course Material, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,  
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/mathematics/18-327-wavelets-filter-banks-and-
applications-spring-2003/.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
22 
 
Course Title Optimization Techniques Course No. MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/PhD (MA) Type Elective 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
1. To train the student in the domain of linear and non-linear programming 
2. To give sufficient tools for solving programming problems which can be used by 
student for further applications in different areas of interest. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Simplex method, Charne’s M-method, Two-phase Method 
2. Duality and Integer programming problem 
3. Transportation problem, assignment Problem, Karmakar’s Algorithm and Wolf’s 
method 
4. Newton’s method, Conjugate direction method and Quasi-Newton methods 
5. KKT conditions, penalty and Barrier Methods, exact penalty functions  
 
Contents 
Linear Programming [23 lectures]: Linear combination of vectors, Convex set, Convex 
hull, Linear programming problem, feasible solution, basic feasible solution, graphical 
solution,  Simplex method Charne’s M method, Two phase method, Solving system of 
equations and finding the inverse of  a matrix using simplex method, duality, 
Complementary Slackness Theorem, Duality and Simplex method, dual simplex 
algorithm, Integer Programming, Gomory’s cut -constraint method, Branch and Bound 
method, Transportation problem, Assignment problem, application of optimization.  
 
Nonlinear Programming [19 lectures] : First and second order conditions, Iterative 
methods, line search methods, global convergence of descent algorithms, Newton’s 
method, Conjugate direction method, Quasi -Newton Method, Constrained o ptimization 
- Lagrange Multipliers, Karush -Kuhn-Tucker conditions, Regular points, Sensitivity 
analysis, Quadratic Programming, Convex problems, applications of optimization. 
 
Text Book 
1. Luenberger, D. G., Linear and Nonlinear Programming, Yinyu Ye, Third  Edition, 
Springer, 2008.  
2. Kambo, N. S., Mathematical Programming Techniques,  Second Edition, Affiliated 
East West Press, 2005  
 
Reference Books 
1. Bazaraa, M. S., Sherali, H.D., and Shetty, C. M., Nonlinear Programming: Theory 
and Algorithms, Third Edition, Wiley publications, 2006 
2. Darst, R, Introduction to Linear Programming: Applications and Extensions, 
Dekker Publications, 1991 
 
Online Course Material: 
1. Goswami, A., Optimization, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mathematics, 
IIT Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111105039/1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23 
 
Course Title Numerical Analysis Course No. MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Elective 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
1. Learn numerical techniques for a variety of mathematical problems 
2. Analyze the validity and error in the numerical results 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Develop an understanding of numerical error and applicability of a particular 
method. 
2. Solve numerically algebraic equations, linear systems of equations, ordinary 
differential equations and eigenvalue problems. 
3. Carry out numerical differentiation, integration, and interpolation 
Contents 
Errors analysis [4 Lectures] : Numerical Algorithms and errors, Floating point systems, 
Types of error, Propagation of Error, the stability of algorithms. 
Nonlinear equations [8 Lectures] : Newton -Raphson Method, Fixed -Point Iteration 
Method, Muller’s method, criterion for acceptance of a root, Rates of Convergence. 
Numerical solution of linear system of equations [8 Lectures]: Ill- conditioned systems, 
iterative methods (Gauss-Seidel method, Gauss-Jacobi method), matrix inversion, Rate 
of Convergence, Rayleigh Quotient, Min -max princi ple, the power and inverse power 
methods for eigenvalue problems. 
Interpolation [8 Lectures] : Errors in polynomial interpolation, finite differences, 
Newton’s formulae for interpolation, Lagrange interpolation formula, Hermite 
interpolation, Spline interpolation. 
Numerical Integration and Differentiation [6 Lectures] : Newton -Cotes integration 
formulae, Difference Formulae, Method of Undetermined Coefficients. 
Numerical IVPs for Ordinary Differential Equations [8 Lectures]: Taylor series method, 
Euler’s Method, Modified Euler’s Methods, Runge-Kutta Methods. 
Tools to be used: MATLAB, Mathematica, Octave, Scilab. 
 
Text Books 
1. Süli, E. and Mayers, D.F., An Introduction to Numerical Analysis, Cambridge Uni. 
Press, 2006. 
2. Sastry, S.S., Introductory Methods of Numerical Analysis, Prentice Hall of India 
Pvt. Ltd., 2007. 
3. Burden, R. L., Numerical Analysis, 9th Edition, Cengage Learning India, 2012 
 
Reference Books 
1. Conte, S.D. and Boor, C., Elementary Numerical Analysis: An Algorithmic 
Approach, Third Edition, McGraw-Hill Publication, 1980 
2. Chapra, S.C., Applied Numerical Methods with MATLAB for Engineers and 
Scientists, 3 Ed., McGraw Hill, 2012 
 
Online course Material  
1. Lal, R. and Banerjee S., Numerical Analysis, NPTEL Course Material, Department 
of Mathematics, IIT Roorkee,  https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107062/ 
2. Usha, R., Numerical Analysis, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Mathematics, IIT Madras, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111106101/ 
 
 
24 
 
Course Title Number Theory Course No. MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Elective 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
 1.To give basic knowledge of Number theory. 
 2. To equip students with number theoretic tools which can be used in their fields of 
interest. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
 1. Basic knowledge of Residue systems and RSA Cryptosystems. 
 2. Diophantine Equations, Pells Equation, Binary Quadratic Forms and their Applications.  
 
Contents 
Introduction [10 Lectures] : Divisibility, prime numbers, properties and their distribution, 
complete and reduced residue systems, theorems of Fermat, Euler & Wilson, application to 
RSA cryptosystem. 
Congruences [10 Lectures] : Linear congruences, Chinese Remainder theorem, quadratic 
congruences, and Quadratic Reciprocity law. 
Arithmetical functions [15 Lectures] : examples, properties and their rate of growth, 
Continued fractions, and their connections with Diophantine approximations, applications 
to linear and Pell’s equations, Binary quadratic forms, Partition: basic properties and 
results. 
Diophatine equations [6 Lectures] : linear, quadratic and higher degree, some general 
equations. 
 
Text Books  
1. David M. Burton, Elementary Number Theory. McGraw Hill Education, 2012. 
2. G. H. Hardy and E. M. Wright. An Introduction to the Theory of Numbers. Oxford 
University Press, 1960. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Niven, H. S. Zuckerman and H. L. Montgomery. An Introduction to the Theory of 
Numbers, Wiley, 1991 
2. K. Ireland, and M. Rosen. A Classical Introduction to Modern Number Theory. GTM -
84, Springer, 1990. 
 
Online Resources 
1. Saikia, A., Number Theory, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mathematics, IIT 
Guwahati, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111103020/. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
Title Statistical Inference Number MAL7XX0 
Departmet Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/Ph.D. (MA) Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
1. To provide background in the area of Statistics. 
2.  To provide sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by students for 
further applications in their respective domains of interest. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
1.  Basic understanding of the Point and Interval Estimation, Testing of Hypotheses, 
Non-parametric Estimation 
2.  Knowledge in Random Sampling, Unbiased Estimation, Bias -Variance Tradeoff, 
Goodness of Fit.  
 
Contents  
Random Sampling & Sampling Distributions [5 lectures] : Random sampling, exact 
sampling distributions: Chi-square, t and F distributions, large sample theory. 
Point and Interval Estimations [16 lectures]: Point estimator, properties of an estimator, 
factorization, MVUE, maximum likelihood method of estimation,  Cramer-Rao bound, 
confidence interval estimation. 
Tests of Hypotheses [21 lectures]: Review of hypotheses testing, Neyman-Pearson theory, 
general linear hypothesis, method of least squares, analysis of variance (one way and two 
way), analysis of categorical data, Chi -square test for goodness of fit, test of 
independence, non-parametric tests. 
 
Text Books  
1. Rohatgi, V. K., Statistical Inference, Dover Publications Inc., 2003. 
2. Hogg, R. V., McKean, J. W., Craig, A. T., Introduction to Mathematical Statistics, 
Pearson, 2009. 
 
Reference Books  
1. Casella, G. and Berger, R. L., Statistical Inference, Brooks/Cole Publishing Company, 
2003. 
2. Rao, C. R., Linear Statistical Inference and Its Applications, Wiley, 2006. 
3. Gibbons, J.D. and Chakroborti, S., Nonparametric Statistical Inference, CRC Press, 
2010 
 
Online Course material: 
1. Zhou Fan, Introduction to Statistical Inference, Online Course Material, Stanford 
University, http://web.stanford.edu/class/stats200/ 
2. Kumar, S., Statistical Inference, NPTEL Course Material, Depart ment of 
Mathematics, IIT Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111105124/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26 
 
Title Stochastic Calculus Number MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D 
[C] 
3–0–0-0 
[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/Ph.D.(MA) Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
1. To develop an understanding of financial market 
2. Given a discrete process, pricing of options, such as European, American, Asian 
and other exotic options 
3. To develop an understanding of change of measure, Martingales and Brownian 
motion 
4. Use of Black-Scholes model under various conditions 
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. Understanding derivatives and securities 
2. Pricing and valuation in discrete case 
3. Binomial model and self-financing strategy 
4. Black Scholes model and interest rate models 
 
Contents  
 
[10 lectures]: General probability spaces, Gaussian and log -normal distribution, 
martingales and stopping times, Brownian motion and its properties, Ito’s integral and 
martingale properties of Ito’s integral. 
 
[12 lectur es]:Continuous time financial market models, Black -Scholes-Merton model, 
Black-Scholes PDE and formulas, risk -neutral valuation, option pricing, the Greeks, put -
call parity, Risk -neutral valuation, risk -neutral measure, Girsanov's theorem for change 
of mea sure, martingale representation theorems, representation of Brownian 
martingales 
 
[20 lectures]: Stochastic differential equations, existence and uniqueness of solutions, 
Feynman-Kac formula and its applications, models with stochastic volatility, pricing a nd 
hedging in incomplete markets, bond markets, term -structures of interest rates, bond 
pricing, Short rate models, martingale models for short rate, Vasicek, Cox -Ingersoll-Ross 
and Hull-White models, multifactor models; Forward rate models, Heath -Jarrow-Morton 
model. 
 
Textbooks  
1. Shreve, S. E., Stochastic Calculus for Finance I; The Binomial Asset Pricing Model 
, Springer-Verlag, 2004  
2. Shreve, S. E., Stochastic Calculus for Finance II; Continuous -Time Model, 
Springer, 2004. 
 
Reference Books  
     1. Baxter, M. and Rennie, A., Financial Calculus, University Press, Cambridge 1996  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
27 
 
Title Calculus of variations and Integral 
Equations 
Number MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-D [3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/Ph.D.(MA) Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce variational problems with methods to solve them. 
2. Introduce the integral transforms and integral equations, and their solution 
methods 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Maximize or minimize functionals associated with the variational problems. 
2. Apply integral transforms to solve differential equations. 
3. Solve Fredholm and Volterra integral equations. 
 
Contents  
 
Calculus of Variation [20 Lectures] : Introduction to Variational problems, functionals, 
Functional dependence on first order derivatives, Euler equations, Functional dependence 
on functions of several independent variables, Variational problems with moving 
boundaries, Rayleigh-Ritz and Galerkin’s Method. 
Integral Transforms [8 Lectures] : Fourier, Fourier sine/cosine and Laplace transforms 
and their properties, convolution theorem and application to solve differential equations.  
Integral Equations [12 Lectures] : Classification of Integral equat ions, Neumann’s 
iterative method for Fredholm’s equation of the second kind, Volterra type integral 
equations, Integral equations of the first kind and Convolution type Integral Equations.  
 
Text books  
1. Gupta, A.S., Calculus of Variation, Prentice Hall of India Pvt. Ltd. 1996 
2. Debnath L. and Bhatta, D., Integral transformations and their applications, 2 nd 
Edition,  Chapman and Hall / CRC publications, 2007 
3. Moiseiwitsch, B. L., Integral equations, Logman, 1977 
 
Reference Books  
1. Gelfand, I. M. and Francis, S.V., Calculus of Variation, Prentice Hall, New Jersey, 
1963 
2. Yosida, K., Lectures on differential and integral equations, Dover, 1991 
3. Hildebrand, F. B. , Methods of applied mathematics, 2nd Ed, Prentice-Hall, 1965 
 
Online Course Material  
1. Agrawal, P.N. and Pandey, D.N., Integral equations, calculus of variations and its 
applications, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mathematics, IIT Roorkee,  
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107103/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28 
 
Title Chaos Theory and its Applications Number MA7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 
[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/PhD (MA) Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
1. To equip the students with the basic fundamentals of chaos theory. 
2. Learning and understanding various routes to chaos.  
3. To introduce applications of chaos to various physical systems and its introduction 
in IFS. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. Notion of chaos in one dimension. 
2. Understanding Bifurcation theory and different routes to chaos. 
3. Two dimensional flows, phase portraits and chaos in higher dimension. 
 
Contents  
Discrete Dynamical Systems[16 Lectures]: One dimensional maps, Fixed points, periodic 
points and Stability, Basin of Attraction, Bifurcation, period doubling and route to chaos, 
Sharkovsky’s theorem, Li -Yorke Theorem, Lorentz System and chaos, Chaos in one 
dimension, density of periodic points, transitivity, sensitive dependence on initial 
conditions, cantor’s set, conjugacy, symbolic dynamics, Various notions of chaos, Phase 
space diagrams, Linear Systems and their stability. 
 
Continuous Dynamical Systems [14 Lectures] : One dimensional flows, chaos in one 
dimension, Fixed points and Stability, Flows on the circle, Bifurcation, Saddle node 
Bifurcation, Transcritical Bifurcation, Pitchfork Bifurcation, Hopf Bifurcation, phase 
portraits,  existence and uniqueness, fixed po ints and linearization, conservative 
systems, limit cycles, Poincare-Bendixson Theorem.   
 
Fractals and Dynamical Systems [12 Lectures] : Fractals, cantor set, dimension of self -
similar fractals, Box dimension, correlation dimension, Iterated Function System , Collage 
Theorem and Image Compression, Julia and Mandelbrot Sets. 
 
Textbook  
1. Saber N.  Elaydi, Discrete Chaos: With Applications in Science and Engineering, 
CRC Press, Second Edition. 
2. Steven H.  Strogatz, Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos:  With Applications to 
Physics, Biology, Chemistry and Engineering, Westview Press, First edition. 
 
Reference Books  
1. H Nagashima and Y Baba, Introduction to Chaos:  Physics and Mathematics of 
Chaotic Phenomena, CRC Press; First edition. 
2. G. Stuck and Michael Brin, Introduction  to Dynamical Systems, Cambridge 
University Press; First edition 
 
Online Course Material  
1. Nagar A. (IIT Delhi) Chaotic Dynamical Systems , 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111102110/ 
2. Banerjee S. (IIT Kharagpur), Chaos, Fractals and Dynamic Systems ,  
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108105054/ 
 
 
 
 
29 
 
Title Machine Learning and Pattern 
Recognition 
Number MA7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 
[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA) Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce the mathematical and statistical techniques used in pattern recognition.  
2. Impart knowledge on differentiate among various pattern recognition techniques. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Formulate high dimensional feature vectors from observations. 
2. Select an appropriate pattern analysis tool for analysing data in a given feature 
space. 
3. Apply pattern analysis tools to practical applications and detect patterns in the 
data. 
 
Contents  
Introduction [2 Lectures] : Definitions, data sets for Pattern Recognition, Different 
Paradigms of Pattern Recognition. 
 
Bayes Decision Theory [8 Lectures] : Bayes Decision Theory: Bayes decision rule, 
Minimum error rate classification, Normal density and discriminant functions, Bayesian 
networks. 
 
Generative Methods [8 Lectures] : Maximum Likelihood and Bayesian Parameter 
Estimation, Nonparametric techniques. 
 
Discriminative Methods [8 Lectures] : Distance -based methods, Linear Discriminant 
Functions, Artificial Neural Networks, Support Vector Machines. 
 
Clustering and Principal Component Analysis [8 Lectures]: k-means clustering, Gaussian 
Mixture Modeling, EM-algorithm, PCA, Kernel PCA, Probabilistic PCA. 
 
Combining Classifiers [8 Lectures] : Bagging and Boosting, Adaboost, Bayesian Model 
Averaging. 
 
Textbook  
1. Duda, R. O., Hart, P. E. and Stork, D., Pattern Classification 2/e, Wiley, 2002.  
2. Bishop, C., Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, Springer, 2006. 
 
Reference Books  
1. Theodoridis, S. and Koutroumbas, K. (2008) Pattern Recognition, Edition 4. 
Academic Press.  
2. MacKay, D.J.C. (2004) Information Theory, Inference and Learning Algorithms, 
Cambridge University Press. 
3. Cristianini, N. and Taylor, J. S. (2000) An Introduction to Support Vector 
Machines, Cambridge University Press. 
 
Online Course Material  
1. Das, S. and Murthy, C.A. (IIT Madras) Pattern Recognition , 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106106046/ 
 
30 
 
Title Numerical solutions of Partial Differential 
Equations 
Number MAL8XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P 
[C] 
3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA) Type Elective  
Prerequisite Partial Differential Equations   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will introduce  
1. finite difference schemes for numerical solutions of partial differential equations 
2. carry out numerical analysis of various finite difference schemes  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. apply finite difference schemes for numerical solution of partial differential 
equations 
2. carry out error analysis and stability analysis of finite difference schemes 
 
Contents  
 
Fractal 1: Numerical methods for PDE (MAL8XX1) 
 
[8 Lectures]  Characterization of PDEs, Finite difference methods for elliptic, parabolic 
and hyperbolic problems. 
 
[6 Lectures] Stability, consistency and convergence theory, dissipation and dispersion, 
error estimates. 
 
Fractal 2: Numerical Analysis for PDE (MAL8XX2) 
 
Parabolic equations [6 Lectures]:  Fourier analysis of the error, Alternating direction 
implicit method 
 
Elliptic equations [6 Lectures] : Stability analysis by the energy method, Error analysis 
with a maximum principle, asymptotic error estimates, convergence result 
 
Hyperbolic equations [10 Lectures]:  CFL condition, Von Neumann stability Analysis, 
upwind scheme, Lax -Wendroff scheme, leap -frog scheme, Hamiltonian systems and 
symplectic schemes 
 
Numerical li near algebra [6 Lectures]:  Classical iterative Methods for solving linear 
systems, large sparse linear systems, GMRES algorithm, preconditioned Conjugate 
Gradient method, multigrid method (overview), Newton's method and its variations for 
solving nonlinear systems. 
 
Text books  
1. Quarteroni, A. and Valli, A. , Numerical Approximation of Partial Differential 
Equations, Springer, 1997 
2. Morton, K. W.  and Mayers, D. F. , Numerical solution of partial differential 
equations, CUP, 2005 
 
Reference Books  
1. Thomas, J. W. , Numerical partial differential equations: Finite difference 
methods, Springer, 1995 
2. Trefethen, L. N. and David Bau III, Numerical Linear Algebra, SIAM, 1997 
 
Online Course Material  
31 
 
1. Nayak, A. K., Numerical methods: Finite Difference Approach, NPTEL Course, 
Department of Mathematics, IIT Roorkee, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107107/. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 