Source: http://intra.iitj.ac.in/acad_website/pg_curriculum/MTechCSE-Compulsory_02082019.pdf
================================================================================

 
 
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur   Course Booklet   for  M.Tech. (CSE)   and   Dual degree M.Tech. (CSE) + PhD    Programs    offered by the   Department of Computer Science and Engineering       July 2019    
 
	   
M.Tech and M.Tech-Ph.D dual degree programs  in Computer Science and Engineering Introduction: Traditionally Computer Science and Engineering (CSE) teaching were focusing on two major areas, i.e., theories and systems (database, computer hardware, and operating systems). With the advent of the era of Cloud Computing, Edge Computing, AI and Big Data, the discipline is being transformed by incorporation of new emerging technologies. It is becoming an instrumental tool in solving major problems faced by modern society such as energy, natural disasters, pollution, and water. Through this newly revamped M.Tech and M.Tech-Ph.D dual degree programs in CSE, IIT Jodhpur is making a conscious effort to divulge from the traditional path and planning to reposition itself to become a leading institute in this new genre of Computer Science education. Objectives: This M.Tech and M.Tech-Ph.D dual degree programs in CSE will offer students with deep knowledge of core and applied computer science. Through this programme, a student will learn niche subject areas which are of paramount importance in the modern big data era, such as Computer Systems and Security. This programme is aiming at imparting the necessary breadth and depth to the students for pursuing careers in academics as well as in industry. This programme is aiming at extending undergraduate computing skills with up-to-date and in-depth expertise in specialized areas of Computer Systems and Security. Expected Graduate Attributes: After completing this programme, a student will be able to develop an ability to: 1. Understand fundamental concepts and hands-on knowledge of emerging fields in Computer Science.  2. Conceive, Design and Develop state-of-the-art scalable parallel and distributed systems 3. Solve Big data problems through the knowledge of advanced data structures, distributed algorithmic design, analysis, and applications.  4. Design and develop network protocols for Wireless, Sensor, Mobile, and Vehicular networks.  5. Ideate, Implement and Integrate cryptographic, fault tolerant algorithms for large scale distributed systems  6. Understand state-of-the-art hardware platforms for running compute intensive distributed algorithms 7. Ability to understand and apply evolving ethics and privacy laws across various domains and territories. 8. Plan and manage technical projects  Learning Outcome: 1. Understand the fundamentals of algorithmic complexity, advanced computer architecture, advanced network, and security protocols. 2. Apply appropriate design principles, framework and protocols to develop dependable systems. 3. Demonstrate hands-on knowledge of cutting edge simulation, synthesizing, programming tools. 4. Ability to design and develop system architecture for mobile, cloud, fog, and edge computing.  5. Demonstrate hands-on knowledge of virtualization, data center design and management, and software defined networking. 6. Skills to comprehend and communicate effectively.  7. Apply appropriate project and business management principles and tools for real-world problems.  	   	  
 
	   
Course	  Structure	  for	  the	  	  M.Tech.	  (CSE)	  Program	  and	  	  Dual	  Degree	  M.Tech.	  (CSE)+Ph.D.	  Program	   	  Cat	  Code	   Course	  Title	   L-­‐T-­‐P	  Cr	  	  Cat	  Code	   Course	  Title	   L-­‐T-­‐P	  Cr	  I	  Semester	   	   II	  Semester	  C	  MAL7xx0	  Statistics	  I	  	  Matrix	  Computation	  	  Optimization	   1-­‐0-­‐0	  1-­‐0-­‐0	  1-­‐0-­‐0	  3	  	  C	   CSL7xx0	  Computer	  Architecture	   3-­‐0-­‐0	  3	  
C	  CSL7xx0	  Algorithms	  for	  Big	  Data	   2-­‐0-­‐0	  2	  	  C	   CSL7xx0	  Software	  and	  Data	  Engineering	   3-­‐0-­‐0	  3	  C	  CSL7xx0	  Machine	  Learning	  I	  3-­‐0-­‐0	  3	  	  C	   CSL7xx0	  Security	  and	  its	  applications	   3-­‐0-­‐0	  3	  C	  CSP7xx0	  Data	  Structures	  and	  Practices	   0-­‐0-­‐2	  1	  	  PE	   xxxxx	  Program	  Elective	  3	   3-­‐0-­‐0	  3	  PE	  xxxxx	   Program	  Elective	  1	  3-­‐0-­‐0	  3	  	  OE	   xxxxx	  Open	  Elective	  1	   3-­‐0-­‐0	  3	  PE	  xxxxx	   Program	  Elective	  2	  3-­‐0-­‐0	  3	  	  NG	  xxxxx	  Ethics	  and	  Professional	  Life	  1-­‐0-­‐0	  1	  NG	  	   Technical	  Communication	   1-­‐0-­‐0	  1	  	  	   	   	   	   	  Total	  Credits:	  16	  	   Total	  Credits:	  16	  *Maths	  Fractals:	  Linear	  Algebra,	  Probability	  and	  Random	  Processes,	  Optimization	  	  Cat	  Code	   Course	  Title	   L-­‐T-­‐P	  Cr	  	  Cat	  Code	   Course	  Title	   L-­‐T-­‐P	  Cr	  III	  Semester	   	   IV	  Semester	  P	  CSD7xx0	   Major	  Project	  –	  Part	  1	  0-­‐0-­‐10	  5	  	  P	   CSD8xx0	   Major	  Project	  –	  Part	  2	   0-­‐0-­‐22	  11	  PE	  xxxxx	  Program	  Elective	  4	   3-­‐0-­‐0	  3	  	  PE	  xxxxx	  Program	  Elective	  6	   3-­‐0-­‐0	  3	  PE	  xxxxx	  Program	  Elective	  5	   3-­‐0-­‐0	  3	  	  NG	  xxxxx	  Intellectual	  Property	   1-­‐0-­‐0	  1	  OE	  xxxxx	  Open	  Elective	  -­‐	  2	   3-­‐0-­‐0	  3	  	  	   	   	   	   	  NG	  xxxxx	  System	  Design	   1-­‐0-­‐0	  1	  	  	   	   	   	   	  Total	  Credits:	  15	  	   Total	  Credits:	  15	  	  Credit	  Distribution	  1	  Program	  Core	   18	  credits	  2	  Program	  Electives	   18	  credits	  3	  Open	  Electives	   6	  credits	  4	  Project	   16	  credits	  5	  Non-­‐graded	  	   4	  credits	  Total	   62	  credits	  	  	   	  
 
	   
	  Program	  Electives	  for	  M.Tech.	  (CSE)	  and	  	  Dual	  Degree	  M.Tech.	  (CSE)+Ph.D.	  Program	  	  Courses	  offered	  by	  Department	  of	  Computer	  Science	  and	  Engineering	  • Advanced	  Computer	  Graphics	  • AI	  for	  Finance	  • Artificial	  Intelligence	  I	  • Artificial	  Intelligence	  II	  • Bio-­‐image	  computing	  • Blockchain	  • Computer	  Graphics	  • Computer	  Vision	  • Computational	  Optimization	  • Data	  Visualization	  • Dependable	  AI	  • Digital	  Image	  Analysis	  • Edge	  and	  Fog	  Computing	  • Embedded	  Systems	  • GPU	  Programming	  • Graph	  Theory	  and	  Applications	  • Human	  Machine	  Interface	  • Information	  Retrieval	  and	  Web	  Mining	  • Introduction	  to	  Augmented	  Reality	  and	  Virtual	  Reality	  • Machine	  Learning	  II	  • Machine	  Learning	  with	  Big	  Data	  • Natural	  Language	  Processing	  • Neuromorphic	  Computing	  and	  Design	  • Real	  time	  Autonomous	  Systems	  • Ad	  hoc	  Wireless	  Networks	  • Selected	  Topics	  in	  Artificial	  Intelligence	  -­‐	  I	  • Selected	  Topics	  in	  Artificial	  Intelligence	  -­‐	  II	  • Selected	  Topics	  in	  Artificial	  Intelligence	  -­‐	  III	  • Selected	  Topics	  in	  Computer	  Science	  -­‐	  I	  • Selected	  Topics	  in	  Computer	  Science	  -­‐	  II	  • Selected	  Topics	  in	  Computer	  Science	  -­‐	  III	  • Social	  Network	  Analysis	  • Speech	  processing	  • Stream	  Analytics	  • Vehicular	  Ad-­‐hoc	  Networks	  (VANETs)	  	  Courses	  offered	  by	  Department	  of	  Electrical	  Engineering	  • Adaptive	  Signal	  Processing	  • Advanced	  Control	  System	  • Advanced	  Digital	  Communication	  • Advanced	  Signal	  Processing	  • Analog	  and	  Interfacing	  Circuits	  • Antenna	  Engineering	  • Applied	  Optimization	  for	  Wireless	  Communication	  
 
	   
• Backhaul	  Networks	  for	  Wireless	  Systems	  • Coding	  Theory	  • Compressive	  Sensing	  	  • Computational	  Imaging	  • Cyber	  Physical	  System	  Modelling	  Laboratory	  • Data	  Compression	  • Digital	  image	  and	  Video	  Processing	  Lab	  • Digital	  Image	  Processing	  and	  Applications	  • Digital	  Signal	  Processing	  • Digital	  Video	  Processing	  • Digital	  VLSI	  	  Design	  • Embedded	  System	  Design	  • Embedded	  System	  Design	  Lab	  • Flexible	  and	  Printed	  Electronics	  • Free	  Space	  Optical	  Communications	  • GNSS	  Signal	  Processing	  • Image	  Sensor	  Design	  and	  Applications	  • Introduction	  to	  Cyber-­‐Physical	  Systems	  • Machine	  Learning	  for	  Communication	  • Mathematical	  Modelling	  and	  Simulation	  • Microfluidics	  Technology	  • Microsystems	  Fabrication	  Technology	  • Millimeter	  Wave	  Technology	  • Multi-­‐rate	  Digital	  Signal	  Processing	  • Nanosensors	  • Network	  Information	  Theory	  • Neuromorphic	  computing	  and	  design	  • Optical	  Fiber	  Communications	  • Optimal	  Filtering	  • Physical	  Layer	  Security	  • Principles	  of	  Data	  and	  System	  Security	  • Real	  Time	  Communications	  • Resource	  Constrained	  AI	  • RF	  IC	  Design	  • RF	  IC	  Design	  Lab	  • Selected	  Topics	  in	  Communication	  I	  	  • Selected	  Topics	  in	  Communication	  I	  	  • Selected	  Topics	  in	  Communication	  II	  • Selected	  Topics	  in	  Communication	  III	  • Selected	  Topics	  in	  Sensors	  &	  IoT	  I	  • Selected	  Topics	  in	  Sensors	  &	  IoT	  II	  • Selected	  Topics	  in	  Sensors	  &	  IoT	  III	  • Selected	  Topics	  in	  Signal	  Processing	  I	  	  • Selected	  Topics	  in	  Signal	  Processing	  II	  • Selected	  Topics	  in	  Signal	  Processing	  III	  • Sensors	  and	  IoT	  Lab	  • Sensors	  and	  Measurement	  • Smart	  Grid	  • Speech	  and	  Audio	  Signal	  Processing	  • Statistical	  Decision	  Theory	  
 
	   
• Systems-­‐on-­‐Chips	  Design	  • VLSI	  Design	  Lab	  • Wavelets	  • Wireless	  Communication	  • Wireless	  Networks	  	  Courses	  offered	  by	  Department	  of	  Mechanical	  Engineering	  • Robotics	  	  Courses	  offered	  by	  Department	  of	  Bioscience	  and	  Bioengineering	  • Bioinformatics	  • Computational	  Biology	  	  Courses	  offered	  by	  Department	  of	  Mathematics	  • Financial	  Engineering	  • Computational	  finance	  • Computational	  Game	  Theory	  • Advanced	  topics	  in	  computational	  PDE	  • Dynamical	  Systems	  • Stochastic	  Processes	  • Representation	  of	  Finite	  Groups	  	   	  Courses	  offered	  by	  Department	  of	  Physics	  • Quantum	  Computing	  • Quantum	  Information	  Processing	  • Quantum	  Cryptography	  and	  Coding	  	  	  Courses	  offered	  by	  IDRP	  Digital	  Humanities	  • Digital	  Humanities	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
 
	   
	   	  
 
	   
Title Algorithms for Big Data Number CSL7XX0 Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] Offered for M.Tech. 1st Year, Ph.D. 1st Year  Type Compulsory  Prerequisite None    Objectives       The Instructor will:  1.  Introduce some algorithmic techniques developed for handling large amounts of data.  2.  Emphasize on both theoretical as well as practical aspects of such algorithms.  Learning Outcomes       The students are expected to have the ability to:  1.  Analyze existing algorithms as well as design novel algorithms pertaining to big data.   Contents  Sketching and Streaming: Extremely small-space data structures (4 lectures)   Numerical linear algebra: Algorithms for big matrices, Regression, Low-rank approximation, Matrix completion (8 lectures)   Compressed Sensing: Sparse signals, Linear measurements, Signal recovery (8 lectures)   External memory and cache-obliviousness: Minimizing I/O for large datasets, Algorithms and data structures such as B-trees, Buffer trees, Multiway mergesort (8 lectures)   Reference Books  Markovsky I, (2014), Low Rank Approximation: Algorithms, Implementation, Applications, Springer Eldar Y C., Kutyniok G. (2012), Compressed Sensing: Theory and Applications, Cambridge University Press.   Self Learning Material  1.   Department of Computer Science, Harvard University, Algorithms for Big Data    
 
	   
 Title Data structures and practices Number CSP7XX0 Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 0–0–2 [1] Offered for M.Tech. (CSE) 1st Year Type Compulsory  Prerequisite Computer Programming    Objectives  The Instructor will: 1. Explain various data structures and provide details to implement and use them in different algorithms  Learning Outcomes  The students are expected to have the ability to: 1. Write, debug and rectify the programs using different data structures  2. Expertise in transforming coding skills into algorithm design and implementation  Contents   Laboratory Experiments  Exercises based on Abstract Data Types: Arrays, link-list/list, hash tables, dictionaries, structures, stack, queues  (4 labs) Data Structures: Heap, Sets, Sparse matrix, Binary Search Tree, B-Tree/ B+ Tree, Graph  (4 labs) Algorithm implementation: Quick or Merge sort, Breadth or Depth first search or Dijkstra’s Shortest Path First algorithm, Dynamic programing (6 labs)  Textbook 1.Weiss, M. A. (2007), Data Structures and Algorithm Analysis in C++, Addison-Wesley. 2. Lipschutz, S. (2017), Data Structures with C, McGraw Hill Education. 3.Cormen, T. H., Leiserson, C. E., Rivest, R. L. and Stein, C., (2009), Introduction to Algorithms, MIT Press    Online Course Material  1. Department of Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Delhi, http://www.nptelvideos.in/2012/11/data-structures-and-algorithms.html     
 
	   
 Title Software and Data Engineering Number CSL7XX0 Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] Offered for M.Tech.  Type Compulsory Prerequisite     Objectives  The Instructor will: 1.  Discuss techniques to manage a large amount of data 2.  Provide mechanisms to design and develop data-intensive computing systems  Learning Outcomes       The students are expected to have the ability to: 1.  Design complex end-to-end data pipeline for data processing 2.  Critically identify and use the tools for data handling and management 3.  Use modern software technologies to design and develop data analytical systems   Contents CSL7XX0 Cloud Computing and Virtualization 1-0-0 [1] Basics of complex software design: Concept of modular software, microservices, communication, 4+1 architectural views and patterns (5 lectures) Cloud Computing: Architecture of cluster computing, design of data centers, open data center platforms, fault-tolerant system design (5 lectures) Virtualization: Type-1 and Type-2 virtualization, virtual machine, containers, dockers (4 lectures)  CSL7XX0 Data Management 1-0-0 [1] Data Management: Structured data, relational database management, unstructured data, semi-structured data,  Nosql database management (mongodb), column database, graph database, XML, JSON, HDFS, Handling drift in data, sensor data reliability at software and algorithmic level, sensor data analysis techniques (14 lectures)  CSL7XX0 Data Intensive Processing Systems 1-0-0 [1] Data Intensive Processing Systems: Architecture of large scale data processing systems, Hadoop, Apache Spark, Storm, parallel data processing concepts such as map-reduce, directed acyclic graph, resilient distributed datasets, dynamic resource allocation, partial & shared computation, storage architecture  (14 lectures)  Textbook  1.  Bass L., Clements P., Kazman R., (2012), Software Architecture in Practice, 3rd edition, Addison-Wesley Professional 2.  Martin K., (2017), Designing Data-Intensive Applications: The Big Ideas Behind Reliable, Scalable, and Maintainable Systems, 1st Edition, O'Reilly Media  Self Learning Material  1.  Tylor,R.N., Medvidovic,N. and Dashofy,E.M., (2014), Software Architecture Foundation: Theory and Practice, Wiley   Preparatory Course Material 1. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 2. International Conference on Data Engineering     
 
	   
 Title Computer Architecture Number CSL7XX0 Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] Offered for M.Tech. 2nd Year Type Compulsory  Prerequisite Computer Organization    Objectives  The Instructor will: 1.  Provide background to understand various components of a modern computer system,       its interconnections, and performance issue  Learning Outcomes  The students are expected to have the ability to: 1.   Explain the working principles of various components of modern computer systems 2.   Compare between systems using benchmark data 3.   Write, execute and debug parallel programs on GPU  Contents CSL7XX0 Multi System Architecture 1-0-0 [1] Introduction: Defining Computer Architecture, Flynn’s Classification of Computers, Metrics for Performance Measurement. (4 lectures) Memory Hierarchy: Introduction, Advanced Optimizations of Cache Performance, Memory Technology and Optimizations, Virtual Memory and Virtual Machines, The Design of Memory Hierarchies, Introduction to Pin Instrumentation and Cache grind, Case Study: Intel Core i7  (10 lectures) CSL7XX0 Multicore Processing 1-0-0 [1] Instruction-Level Parallelism: Instruction-level Parallelism: Concepts and  Challenges, Basic Compiler Techniques for Exposing ILP, Reducing Branch Costs with  Advanced Branch Prediction, Dynamic Scheduling, Superscalar, Limitations of ILP, Case  Study: Dynamic Scheduling in Intel Core i7. (9 lectures) Multicore Processor: Introduction, CPU Interconnections, Network on Chip (NoC), Routing Protocols, Quality of Service on NoC. (5 lectures) CSL7XX0 Fundamentals of Parallel Programming  1-0-0 [1] Data Level Parallelism: Introduction, Vector Architecture, SIMD Instruction Set Extensions for Multimedia, Graphics Processing Units, GPU Memory Hierarchy, Detecting and Enhancing Loop- Level Parallelism, CUDA Programming, Case Study: Nvidia Maxwell. (14 lectures)  Textbook  1. 1. Hennessy,J.L. and Patterson,D.A., (2012), Computer Architecture: A Quantitative Approach, 5th Edition, Morgan Kauffmann Publishers  2. 2. Shen,J.P. and Lipasti,M.H., (2005), Modern Processor Design: Fundamentals of Superscalar Processors, McGraw-Hill Publishers   Self-Learning Material  1.  1.  CUDA: https://developer.nvidia.com/cuda-zone 3.  2.  OpenMP: https://www.openmp.org/      Preparatory Course Material  1.  Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106106134/     
 
	   
Title Machine Learning-1 Number CSL7XX0 Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] Offered for M.Tech. 1st Year, Ph.D. 1st Year Type Compulsory Prerequisite None     Objectives       The Instructor will: 1.  Provide motivation and understanding of the need and importance of Machine Learning in today’s world  2.  Provide details about various algorithms in Machine Learning   Learning Outcomes  The students are expected to have the ability to: 1. Develop a sense of Machine Learning in the modern context, and independently work   on problems relating to Machine Learning  2. Design and program efficient algorithms related to Machine Learning, train models,  conduct experiments, and deliver ML-based applications   Contents   CSL7XX1: Introduction to Machine Learning: Supervised Learning 1-0-0[1] Introduction: Motivation, Different types of learning, Linear regression, Logistic regression (2 lectures)  Gradient Descent: Introduction, Stochastic Gradient Descent, Subgradients, Stochastic Gradient Descent for risk minimization (2 lectures)  Support Vector Machines: Hard SVM, Soft SVM, Optimality conditions, Duality, Kernel trick, Implementing Soft SVM with Kernels (4 lectures)  Decision Trees: Decision Tree algorithms, Random forests (2 lectures)  Neural Networks: Feedforward neural networks, Expressive power of neural networks, SGD and Backpropagation (3 lectures)  Model selection and validation: Validation for model selection, k-fold cross-validation, Training-Validation-Testing split, Regularized loss minimization (1 lectures)   CSL7XX2: Introduction to Machine Learning: Unsupervised Learning and Generative Models 1-0-0[1] Nearest Neighbour: k-nearest neighbour, Curse of dimensionality (1 lecture)  Clustering: Linkage-based clustering algorithms, k-means algorithm, Spectral clustering (3 lectures)  Dimensionality reduction: Principal Component Analysis, Random projections, Compressed sensing (2 lectures)  Generative Models: Maximum likelihood estimator, Naive Bayes, Linear Discriminant Analysis, Latent variables and Expectation-maximization algorithm, Bayesian learning (5 lectures)  Feature Selection and Generation: Feature selection, Feature transformations, Feature learning (3 lectures)  CSL7XX3: Introduction to Machine Learning: Computational Learning Theory and Deep Learning 1-0-0[1] Statistical Learning Framework: PAC learning, Agnostic PAC learning, Bias-complexity tradeoff, No free lunch theorem, VC dimension, Structural risk minimization, Adaboost (7 lectures)  Foundations of Deep Learning: DNN, CNN, RNN, Autoencoders (7 lectures)  Textbook 1. Shalev-Shwartz,S., Ben-David,S., (2014), Understanding Machine Learning: From Theory to Algorithms, Cambridge University Press   Reference Books  1. Mitchell Tom (1997). Machine Learning, Tata McGraw-Hill   Self Learning Material  1.   Department of Computer Science, Stanford University,        https://see.stanford.edu/Course/CS229     
 
	   
Title Security and Its Application Number CSL7XX0 Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] Offered for M.Tech.  Type Elective   Prerequisite Networks   Objectives  The Instructor will:  1.  Provide the fundamental principles of access control models and techniques, authentication and secure system design 2.  Introduce a strong understanding of different cryptographic protocols and techniques and be able to use them 3.   Provide methods for authentication, access control, intrusion detection and prevention Learning Outcomes  The students are expected to have the ability to:  1.   Understand cryptography and network security concepts and application 2.   Identify and investigate network security threat 3.   Analyze and design network security protocols  Contents CSL7xx1 Introduction to Cryptography 1-0-0 [1] Shannon’s Approach to Cryptography: Measures of security, Perfect secrecy, Definition of entropy, One-time pad (3 lectures) Symmetric Key Cryptography: The notion of a symmetric key cryptography, The Data Encryption Standard (DES) and differential cryptanalysis, The Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) (4 lectures) Cryptographic Hash Functions: Definition of hash functions and properties, Unkeyed hash functions, Keyed hash functions, Message Authentication Codes (MAC), The Random Oracle Model (ROM) (4 lectures) Authentication: Definition of authentication, A simple authentication protocol and possible attacks, Strong password protocols, BM Encrypted Key Exchange (EKE), Key Distribution Centers (KDC), Certification authorities and certificate revocation, KDC based authentication protocols (3 lectures) CSL7xx2 Network Security  1-0-0 [1] Public Key Cryptosystems: Fundamentals of Public-key Cryptography, Background on number theory, The RSA public key cryptosystem, The ElGamal public key cryptosystem and discrete logs Digital Signatures: An RSA based signature scheme, The ElGamal based signature scheme,The Schnorr signature scheme, The Digital Signature Algorithm (DSA) (6 lectures) Key Distribution and Key Agreement Protocols: Key Predistribution: Diffie-Hellman key Exchange, The MTI key Exchange (4 lectures) Network Security: TCP/IP threats, The IPSEC protocol, The SSL and TLS protocols, Firewalls and Virtual Private Networks (VPNs), Electronic mail security, Worms, DDoS attacks, BGB and security considerations (4 lectures) CSL7xx3 Cyber-physical security and Blockchain 1-0-0 [1] (fractal 3) Cyber-physical security: IoT security, sensor actuator network security (4 lectures) Block Chain: Introduction to Blockchain, Blockchain Architecture and Design, Consensus (Byzantine Fault, Proof of Work, Poof of Stake,), Permissioned Blockchains, Components of blockchain (10 lectures) Laboratory Experiments  Programming exercises using Exata and  AVISPA Tools  Textbook  1.Stallings, W. (2017). Cryptography and network security, 7/E. Pearson Education India  2. Douglas R. Stinson, Maura B. Paterson (2018). Cryptography: theory and practice. 4/E Chapman and Hall/CRC  Reference Books  1. Mao, W. (2004). Modern cryptography: theory and practice. Pearson Education India 2.   Pfleeger, C. P., & Pfleeger, S. L. (2018). Security in computing. 5/E,  Prentice Hall Professional Technical Reference 3.   Goldreich, O. (2009). Foundations of cryptography: volume 2, basic applications. Cambridge university press 4.   Forouzan, B. A. (2015). Cryptography & network security. 3/E, McGraw-Hill, Inc.  Self Learning Material  1.   Network and Computer Security - MIT OpenCourseWare https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-857-network-and-
 
	   
computer-security-spring-2014/ 2.   Cryptography I,  Coursera, Stanford University, https://www.coursera.org/learn/crypto 
 