Source: http://intra.iitj.ac.in/acad_website/pg_curriculum/PG_Booklet_July_2019_updated_20Aug19.pdf
================================================================================

      
 
 
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur 
 
   
 
 
 
 
PG Course Booklet 
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur 
July 2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This page is left blank, intentionally. 
3 
 
INDEX 
 
Sr. 
No. 
Programs  Department  Page No. 
 
1.  M.Tech in Advanced Manufacturing and Design Mechanical 
Engineering 
4-37 
2.  M.Tech and M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree in Thermofluids 
Engineering 
38-65 
3.  M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree in Design Engineering 
4.  M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree in Manufacturing Engineering 
5.  M.Tech in Metallurgical and Materials Engineering Metallurgical and 
Materials 
Engineering 
66-96 
6.  M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree in Metallurgical and Materials 
Engineering 
7.  M.Tech. and M.Tech. Ph.D. Dual Degree in Data and 
Computational Sciences 
Mathematics 97-118 
8.  M.Sc. - M.Tech. Dual degree Data and Computational 
Sciences 
9.  M.Tech, M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree and Ph.D. in Artificial 
Intelligence 
Computer 
Science and 
Engineering 
119-134 
10.  M.Tech., MTech-PhD Dual Degree and Ph.D. in Computer 
Science and Engineering 
135-197 
11.  M.Tech and M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree in Cyber Physical 
Systems 
Electrical 
Engineering 
198-210 
12.  M.Tech in Sensors and Internet of Things 211-245 
13.  M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree in Communication & Signal 
Engineering 
246-326 
14.  M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree in Sensors and Internet of Things 
15.  M.Tech and M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree in Bioscience and 
Bioengineering 
Bioscience and 
Bioengineering 
327-432 
16.  Master of Science – Physics Physics 433-537 
17.  Master of Science – Chemistry Chemistry 538-591 
18.  Master of Science – Mathematics Mathematics 592-621 
19.  Courses by Humanities and Social Sciences Humanities and 
Social Sciences 
622-632 
20.  Non Graded Institute Level Courses for M.Tech. and Ph.D. 
 
For M.Tech. and 
Ph.D. 
633-636 
21.  Ph.D. Program in Digital Humanities - IDRP - 637-660 
22.  Ph.D. Program in Quantum Information and Computation- 
IDRP 
- 661-665 
23.  Ph.D. Program in Smart Healthcare- IDRP - 666-694 
 
 
 
 
 
  
4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
M Tech  
 
in  
Advanced Manufacturing and Design 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Introduction 
M. Tech program in Advanced Manufacturing and Design at IIT Jodhpur provides a strong 
interdisciplinary focus with the objective of providing the student technical leadership in design 
processes and manufacturing systems. The program aims to hone engineeri ng problem -solving 
skills of the student through a rigorous training in modern computational and experimental tools 
required in the domain of mechanical design, manufacturing processes and systems with focus on 
product development. The core program will have courses in the areas of Engineering Mathematics, 
Solid Mechanics, Dynamics and Control, Product Design and Manufacturing with focus on recent 
industrial and research trends such as Smart Manufacturing and Industry 4.0. Through advanced 
electives in mode rn areas like Robotics, Mechatronics Systems Design, Additive Manufacturing, 
Composite Structure design and manufacturing the student can further specialize in different 
domains. The program plans to establish synergy with Department of Electrical Engineer ing and 
Computer Science and Engineering by incorporating electives in the areas of Cyber Physical 
Systems, Sensors, Bio-mimetics, MEMs and nano -device design and manufacturing  IoT and 
Artificial Intelligence. The role of new and smart materials in product  design and manufacturing will 
be accomplished through electives from Department of Metallurgical and Materials Engineering. The 
program will have strong emphasis on the thesis work involving interdisciplinary research activity 
in the emerging areas of design and manufacturing. 
Objective of the Program: 
To develop professionals in the domain of mechanical design and manufacturing by imparting 
analytical and computational skills that enables an individual to handle problems in thrust areas 
such as structural  design, design of advanced electro -mechanical systems, robotics, mechatronic 
systems design, additive manufacturing and smart manufacturing.  
Expected Graduate Attributes: 
1) Ability to undertake academic and industrial research in the areas Advanced Manufac turing 
and Design using analytical, computational and experimental tools 
2) Understanding about recent thrust areas in the domain such as advanced multi -functional 
structure design, mechanical behavior of modern materials, robotics, mechatronic systems 
design, additive manufacturing, smart manufacturing etc. 
3) Ability to appreciate the need of multidisciplinary approach in solving problems in the domain  
4) Ability to handle analytical and experimental tools in the areas related to the program  
5) Ability to carry out critical, creative and innovative thinking 
6) Ability to express ideas in the written and oral formats 
7) Development of appreciation and commitment to professional ethics 
Learning outcome: 
1) Understanding of the fundamentals related to mechanical design, CAD and design 
optimization 
2) Knowledge of engineering materials, manufacturing processes and systems in the context of 
product development 
3) Developing awareness about recent industrial trends such as smart manufacturing, 
autonomous Systems, Industry 4.0 through cour ses such as Computer Aided Manufacturing 
and Industrial Robotics 
4) Knowledge of interdisciplinary topics such as machine learning, artificial intelligence, 
autonomous systems, signal and image processing etc. 
5) Demonstrate the skills in the above areas by using or developing computational and analytical 
tools 
6) Demonstrate advanced skills to communicate scientific ideas and /or application systems. 
Compulsory Topics/Skills: 
6 
 
Design Advanced Manufacturing Others 
a) Mechanical Design, 
Advanced Mechanics of 
Solids,  Introduction to 
Finite Element Analysis 
b) Engineering optimization -  
classical and heuristics 
methods and tools 
c) Computer Aided Design – 
theory and tools 
a) Manufacturing processes and 
systems in the context of 
product development 
b) CNC Machine tools 
c) Fundamentals of smart 
manufacturing and Industry 
4.0 
d) Additive Manufacturing 
a) Introductory Machine 
Learning 
b) Sensor technology and 
its applications 
c) Technical Writing Skills 
d) Project Management 
using tools e.g. 
Microsoft Project 
e) Practices related to 
professional ethics  
f) Knowledge of IP 
 
a) Engineering Materials, Properties; Selection of engineering 
materials 
b) Industrial Robotics 
 
 
Elective Topics/Skills: 
Design Advanced Manufacturing Inter disciplinary 
a) Mechanical vibration  
b) Structural Dynamics 
c) Acoustics 
d) Rotor Dynamics 
e) Composite Structures 
f) Finite Element Methods 
g) Multibody Dynamics 
h) Damage and Fracture 
Mechanics 
i) Smart materials and 
structures  
j) Experimental Mechanics; 
nonlinear dynamics; 
k) MEMS and Nano -
structures 
l) Advanced Mechanisms 
m) Noise, Vibration and 
Harshness 
a) Computer Ai ded 
Manufacturing 
b) Multi-scale manufacturing 
c) Product Design and 
Development 
d) Design for X 
e) Process Engineering and 
Tool Design 
f) Metrology for Engineers 
g) Theory of Arc Welding 
Processes 
h) Metallurgy of Joining 
Processes 
i) Mechanical Metallurgy 
j) Quality Control of 
Weldments 
a) Digital signal processing 
b) Machine Vision  
c) Biomaterials 
d) Introduction to IoT  
e) Introduction to CPS 
f) AI- theory and 
applications 
g) Data Analysis 
a) Theory of plasticity 
b) Mechatronic Systems Design 
c) Autonomous Systems and Autonomous Vehicles 
d) Feedback control 
 
 
7 
 
Course Structure: 
 
 
Summary of courses (category wise) for M. Tech (AMD) Program: 
 
S. N. Course Type Credits 
1 Program Core (MC) 19 
2 Program Elective  (ME) 15 
3 Open Electives (MO) 6 
4 Project (MP) 16 
5 Non-Graded Humanities (NH) 04 
Total 60 
 
 
 
 
 
Ca
t. 
Course Number, Course 
Title 
L-T-P Cr  Ca
t. 
Course Number, Course 
Title 
L-T-P C
r 
I Semester  II Semester 
MC MEL7XX0: Advanced 
Mechanics of Solids 
3-0-0-0 3  MC MEL7XX0: Materials & 
Manufacturing Processes 
2-0-2-
0 
3 
MC EE: Introduction to 
Sensors (Fractal 
Course) 
1-0-0-0 1  MC MEL7XX0: Robotic 
MEL7XX1: Robot 
Modeling 
MEL7XX2: Robot Control 
MEL7XX3: Motion 
Planning and 
Programming 
 
1-0-2-
0 
1-0-0-
0 
1-0-0-
0 
 
2 
1 
1 
 
MC CS: Introduction to 
Machine Learning 
(Fractal course) 
1-0-0-0 1  MC MEL7XX0: Industry 4.0 
Applications in 
Manufacturing Systems 
1-0-0-
0 
1 
MC MEP7XX0: Smart 
Manufacturing 
1-0-2-0 2  ME Program Elective 3-0-0-
0 
3 
MC MEL7XX0: Geometric 
Modeling & CAD 
2-0-2-0 3  ME Program Elective 3-0-0-
0 
3 
MC MA: Optimization 
(Fractal course) 
1-0-0-0 1  NH OAL7XX0: Innovation 
and IP Managment 
1-0-0-
0 
1 
ME Program Elective 3-0-0-0 3      
NH HSN7XX0: Technical 
Communication 
1-0-0-0 1      
Total 1
5 
 Total 15 
     
III Semester  IV Semester 
ME  MED8XX0: Project 0-0-0-5 5  ME MED8XX0: Project 0-0-0-
11 
11 
ME Program Elective 3-0-0-0 3  MO Open Elective 3-0-0-0 3 
ME Program Elective 3-0-0-0 3  NH HSN7XX0:  Professional 
Ethics 
1-0-0-0 1 
MO Open Elective 3-0-0-0 3      
NH OAN7XX0: Systems 
Engineering and Project 
Management 
1-0-0-0 1      
Total 1
5 
 Total 15 
Grand Total 60 
8 
 
Tentative Program Electives (ME):  
Design Engineering 
Domain 
MEL7XX0: Theory of Vibrations 
MEL7XX0: Mechanical Vibrations 
MEL7XX0: Helicopter Dynamics 
MEL7XX0: Modeling and Control of Mechanical Systems 
MEL7XX0: Multibody Dynamics 
MEL7XX0: Finite Element Methods in Engineering 
MEL7XX0: Rotor Dynamics 
AVL7XX0: Autonomous Mobile Robots 
BBXXX: Biomechanics 
Advanced 
Manufacturing 
Domain 
MEL7XX0: Computer Aided Manufacturing 
MEL7XX0: Mechanical Metallurgy 
MEL7XX0: Theory of Arc Welding 
MEL7XX0: Welding Metallurgy 
MEL7XX0: MEMS and Microsystems Technology 
MEL7XX0: Precision and Micro-Manufacturing 
MEL7XX0: Applied Ergonomics 
MEL7XX0: Mechatronic Systems Design 
MEL7XX0: Additive Manufacturing 
MEL7XX0: Design for X 
MEL7XX0: Computer Aided Inspection and Quality Control 
MEL7XX0: Welding: Metallurgy, Defects and Testing 
MEL7XX0: Non-Conventional Welding Processes 
MEL7XX0: Welding inspection and Quality Control 
MEL7XX0: Microfluidics Technology 
BBXXX: Medical Devices and Implants 
MTXXX: Solidification Processing 
MTXXX: Light Metals and Alloys 
MTXXX: Powder Metallurgy 
MTXXX: Thermo-Mechanical Processing 
MTXXX: Near-Net Forming 
MTXXX: Platic Deformation and Microstructure Evaluation 
MTXXX: Corrosion Engineering 
MAXXX: Statistics I 
MAXXX: Statistics II 
MAXXX: Reliability Theory 
CSXXX: Artificial Intelligence I 
CSXXX: Machine Learning I 
EEXXX: Introduction to CPS 
EEXXX: Analog and Interfacing Circits (fractal) 
  
9 
 
Program Core: 
 
Title Advanced Mechanics of Solids Number MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3-0-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Program Core 
Prerequisite  
 
Objectives: 
 1. Enable students to learn advanced concepts of stress analysis 
 2. Apply concepts to analysis of mechanical systems such as rotating disks, thick cylinders 
etc. 
 
Learning Outcomes: 
1. Develop Ability to solve advanced stress analysis problems using analytical and 
numerical methods 
2. Ability to formulate and solve 3D problems in stress analysis 
 
Contents: 
1. Introduction to Cartesian tensors, Stress: Normal and shear stress, Equilibrium 
equations (force and moment), Symmetry of shear tensor, Equilibrium at boundary 
(Cauchy Equation). 2 -D problems Plane stress, Stress tran sformation, Principal 
stresses, maximum shear stress, Mohr‟s circle (7 Lectures) 
2. Displacements and strains, Green‟s strain, Compatibility condition, Plane strain 
Problems, Strain transformation, Strain gage and rosette (5 Lectures) 
3. Structural Approximations: Physical and mathematical. Structural elements -bars, 
beams, plates, membrane, shear panel, shells (1 Lectures) 
4. Mechanical behavior of Engineering Materials, Effect of Temperature, Anisotropic, 
Isotropic, Orthotropic materials, Failure Criteria (Distortion strain energy, Octahedral 
shear stress) Maximum normal stress, Maximum Shear stress (Tresca), Maximum 
distortion energy (von-Mises and Hencky) (4 Lectures) 
5. Theory of Elasticity,  Plane Stress Problem with Stress formulation in 2 -D, Plane 
Strain Problem with Stress Formulation in 2 -D, Airy‟s stress function, stress, strain 
and equilibrium in polar coordinates, Displacement formulation with plane stress, St. 
Venant‟s Principle (4 Lectures) 
6. Bending and extension of beams, stress-resultants, Equilibrium equations in terms of 
deformation with transverse and axial load (3 Lectures) 
7. Torsion of slender bodies (beams), Prandtl stress function formulation, Membrane 
analogy, Closed form beam torsion analytical solution, Warping function formulation, 
Thin Walled open sections, Torsion constants for rolled and extruded beams, Thin 
walled closed sections, Shear flow (8 Lectures) 
8. Beam shearing stresses due to shear forces, Shear Centre (3 Lectures) 
9. Euler Buckling (3 Lectures) 
10.  Principle of virtual-work (4 Lectures) 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Srinath, L.S. (2009), Advanced Solid Mechanics, Tata McGraw-Hill 
2. Timoshenko, S.P., and Goodier, J.N. (1980), Theory of Elasticity, Tata McGraw- Hill 
3. Sadd, M. H. (2006),  Elasticity: Theory, Applications and Numerics, Academic Pres s 
  
Self Learning Material: 
1. http://nptel.ac.in/courses/105106049/  
  
10 
 
 
Title Smart Manufacturing Number MEP7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 1-0-2-0 [2] 
Offered for  Type Program Core 
Prerequisite  
 
Objectives: 
1. Introduce students to the fundamentals of smart manufacturing  
 
Learning Outcomes: 
1. appreciate concepts and basic framework necessary for smart manufacturing 
2. develop understanding about harnessing smartness into manufacturing processes from 
the data 
Contents: 
1. Introduction: Industrial revolutions, Interplay  between CS, ICT and manufacturing  
automation, Concept of Smart Machine tool (4 Lectures) 
2. Concept of Cyber Physical Systems (CPS) and Cyber Physical Production System 
(CPPS), System Architecture for implementation of CPPS, Components for CPPS, 
Communication for CPPS (6 Lectures) 
3. Case Studies: CPPS modules for machine tools, Plug-and-play systems, Clip-on systems 
(4 Lectures) 
Laboratory Exercises:  
a. Implementation of Sensors in manufacturing applications 
b. Working with embedded hardware e.g. Arduino, Rasberry Pi etc. 
c. Data acquisition mechanisms  
d. Data interpretation techniques and tools 
e. Development of feedback systems 
f. Mini-projects aiming at development of smart manufacturing processes  
 
Reference Books: 
1. Tao F., Zhang M., and Nee A. Y. C. (2019), Digital Twin Driven Smart Manufacturing, 
Academic Press 
2. Jeschke S., Brecher C., Song H., and Rawat D. B. (2017), Industrial Internet of Things – 
Cybermanufacturing Systems, Springer   
 
Self-Learning Material: 
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106105195/10 
 
  
11 
 
Title Geometric Modeling and CAD Number MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 2-0-2-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Program Core 
Prerequisite  
 
Objectives: 
1. To introduce the concepts of geometric modelling and its used in Computer Aided Design  
 
Learning Outcomes: 
1. Understanding fundamentals of geometric modelling techniques 
2. Understand the application of geometric modelling and CAD techniques in creation of 
product design 
Contents: 
1. Introduction to Computer Aided Design, Fundamentals of Computer Graphics (2 
Lectures)  
2. Two- and Three-dimensional transformations and projections (6 Lectures) 
3. Geometric modelling of curves: Hermite, Bezier, B-spline, NURBS (8 Lectures)   
4. Parametric representation of surfaces: Planar, Ruled, Surface of revolution, Generic 
Surfaces (8 Lectures)   
5. Part modelling techniques: Wireframe, Surface and Solid Modelling (4 Lectures)   
6. Data representation and exchange formats, geometry and topology (2 Lectures) 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Newman W., Sproull, R. (2001), Principles of interactive Computer Graphics, McGraw 
Hill  
2. Mortenson M. (2006), Geometric modelling, Industrial Press 
3. Rogers D.F, and Adams J. A., Mathematical elements of Computer Graphics, McGraw Hill 
 
Self-Learning Material: 
1. http://nptel.ac.in/courses/106108056/ 
2. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112104031/ 
3. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112102101/ 
 
 
  
12 
 
Title Materials and Manufacturing Processes Number MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 2-0-2-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Program Core 
Prerequisite  
 
Objectives: 
The course aims at imparting knowledge related to  
1. mechanical behavior of materials and their manufacturability  
2. various manufacturing processes  
 
Learning Outcomes: 
A student is expected to  
1. understand the mechanical behavior of materials and their role in manufacturing 
2. develop capability to understand various manufacturing processes  
 
Contents: 
Fractal I: Material Characterization (14 Lectures)   
1. Mechanical behavior of materials, Materials and design (1 Lecture)  
2. Evolution of Engineering Materials and their Properties, Materials selection charts, 
Selection of Engineering materials, Selection of Manufacturing Processes (7 Lectures) 
3. In-situ testing and inspection of components, Non-destructive testing, Examples and Case 
studies (6 Lectures) 
 
Fractal II: Advanced Manufacturing (14 Lectures) 
1. Classification,  operating  parameters,  and  throughputs  of  manufacturing  processes (1 
Lecture) 
2. Generative, Additive,  and Removal  Processes;  Conventional  and  Non -conventional  
processes; Contact and Non-contact  processes (6 Lectures)   
3. Hybrid manufacturing processes (4 Lectures)  
4. Scaling laws and multi-scale manufacturing (3 Lectures) 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Dieter G E, Mechanical Metallurgy, McGraw Hill 
2. Ashby M F and Johnson K., Materials and Design, Butterworth-Heinemann 
3. Ghosh A., and Mallick A. K., Manufacturing Science, EWP 
 
Online Course Material: 
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112107144/# 
2. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112105127/ 
3. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/110106044/# 
4. https://nptel.ac.in/noc17_me27 
  
13 
 
Title Robotics  Number MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3-0-2-0 [4] 
Offered for B. Tech (ME), M. Tech(AMD) and PhD Type Program Core 
Prerequisite  
 
Objectives 
1. To introduce fundamental aspects of modeling and control of robot manipulators. 
2. To provide a brief of results from geometry, kinematics, dynamics, motion planning and 
control 
Learning Outcomes 
1. The course will equip students with theoretical and practical knowledge of robot 
modeling, programming and control. 
Contents: 
Fractal 1: Robot Modeling [MEL7XX1] [1-0-0] 
1. Rotational Transformations, Composition of Rotations, Parameterizations of Rotations, 
Rigid Motions, Homogeneous Transformations (2 lectures) 
2. Forward and Inverse Kinematics – Kinematic Chains, Forward Kinematics: The Denavit -
Hartenberg Convention, Inverse Kinematics, Kinematic Decoupling (4 lectures) 
3. Velocity Kinematics – The Jacobian: Angular and Linear Velocity: The General Case, 
Derivation of the Jacobian, Analytical Jacobian, Singularities, Inverse Velocity and 
Acceleration (4 lectures) 
4. Robot Dynamics: Equations of Motion, Kinetic and Potential Energy, Euler -Lagrange 
Equations, Properties of Robot Dynamic Equations, Recursive Newton -Euler Formulation 
(4 lectures) 
Fractal 2: Motion Planning and Programming [MEL7XX2] [1-0-0] 
1. Path and Trajectory Planning: Path vs. Trajectory, The Configuration Space, Path 
Planning Using Configuration Space, Potential Fields, Trajectory Planning, Point To Poin t 
Motion, Paths Specified by Via Points, Probabilistic Roadmap Planner (5 lectures) 
2. Vision-Based Control: The Geometry of Image Formation, Camera Calibration, Camera 
Motion and Interaction Matrix, Image -Based Control Laws, Relation between End Effector 
and Camera Motions, Partitioned Approaches (4 lectures) 
3. Robot Operating System (ROS): Basic ROS concepts, Writing RoS Programs, Log 
Messages, Graph Resource Name, Launch Files, Parameters, Services, Recording and 
Replaying Services (5 lectures) 
Fractal 3: Robot Control[MEL7XX3] [1-0-0] 
1. Sensors and Actuators: Joint Actuating Systems, Drives, Proprioceptive Sensors, 
Exteroceptive Sensors (3 lectures) 
2. Linear Control: Feedback and closed-loop control, second-order linear systems, control of 
second-order systems, C ontrol-law partitioning, trajectory -following control, disturbance 
rejection, continuous vs. Discrete time control, modeling and control of a single joint, 
architecture of an industrial-robot controller (3 lectures) 
3. Nonlinear control: Nonlinear and time -varying systems, multi -input, multi-output control 
systems, control of manipulators, practical considerations, current industrial -robot control 
systems, lyapunov stability analysis, cartesian-based control systems, adaptive control (4 
lectures) 
4. Force Control: Interaction with Environment, Compliance Control, Impedance Control, 
Force Control, Hybrid Force/Motion control (4 lectures) 
Laboratory Classes (12 exercises) 
DH Parameters, Forward and Inverse Kinematics of Robot, Robot Trajectory Planning, 
Robot Operating System (ROS), Control of Robot through ROS, Path Planning, Vision 
Based control, Force Control 
Reference Books 
1. Saha S. K., Introduction to robotics. Tata McGraw-Hill Education 
2. Spong M. W., Hutchinson, S., and Vidyasagar, M., Robot modeling and c ontrol. New 
York: Wiley. 
3. O'Kane  J. M.,  A Gentle Introduction to ROS, ISBN 978-1492143239 
4. Craig J. J, Introduction to robotics: mechanics and control. Pearson/Prentice Hall.  
Self Learning Material  
1. https://see.stanford.edu/Course/CS223A 
 
14 
 
Title Industry 4.0 Applications in 
Manufacturing Systems  
Number MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 1-0-0-0 [1] 
Offered for  Type Program Core 
Prerequisite  
 
Objectives: 
The Instructor will: 
1. provide  brief understanding  about Industry 4.0 concepts in manufacturing systems 
 
Learning Outcomes: 
The students are expected to appreciate: 
1. current trends at system level in manufacturing organizations 
2. the importance of industry 4.0 concepts at manufacturing systems 
 
Contents: 
 
Introduction to Manufacturing systems (2 Lecture) 
Automated Manufcturing Systems: Concept of Group Technology and cellular 
manufacturing, Flexible Manufacturing Systems, Lean Manufacturing, Agile Manufacturing 
(6 Lectures)  
Industry 4.0 for Manufacturing Systems: Agent Based Ma nufacturing, Cloud Based 
Manufacturing (6 Lectures) 
Reference Books:  
1. Talavage J., and Hanman R. G, Flexible Manufacturing Systems in Practice, Taylor and 
Francis 
2. Gunasekaran A., Agile Manufacturing: 21st Century Competitive Strategy, Elsevier 
3. Wang L., and  Vincent W. X., Cloud Based Cyber -Physical Systems in Manufacturing, 
Springer 
 
Self-Learning Material: 
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106105195/10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
Program Electives: 
Title Computer-Aided Manufacturing  Number MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3-0-2-0 [4] 
Offered for  Type Program Elective 
Prerequisite  
Objectives: 
The Instructor will: 
1. introduce concepts of CNC Technology and its usefulness in manufacturing   
2. provide brief understanding  of CAPP, AM and CAI concepts 
 
Learning Outcomes: 
The students are expected to appreciate: 
1. the benefits derived  from computer applications in manufacturing 
2. recent trends in the domain of advanced manufacturing 
 
Contents: 
1. Introduction:  Introduction  to  Automation,  Numerical  Control  (NC)  Technology,  
Computer Numerical  Control  (CNC),  Direct  and  Distributed  Numerical  Control  (DNC),  
Importance  of CNC  machines  in  Flexible  Manufacturing  Systems  (FMS)  and  
Computer  Integrated Manufacturing Systems (CIMS) (3 Lectures) 
2. CNC Hardware: Components of CNC system, Classification of CNC machines, Axes 
Designation, CNC  Hardware  elements  including  drives,  actuators,  sensors,  controllers  
and  machine  tool elements,  CNC  interpolators,  Tooling  and  work-holding  devices  for  
CNC  machines,  Fixtures for CNC machine tools, Automatic tool changers and automatic 
pallet changers (5 Lectures) 
3. CNC  Programming:  Axes  designation  in  CNC  machines,  Fundamentals  part  
programming, Programming formats, Programming for CNC Lathes and Milling machines, 
Use of advanced programming  features  such  as subroutines,  canned  cycles,  
Automated  Programmed  Tools, Compensation in CNC machine tools (12 Lectures) 
4. Machining of Fr eeform Surfaces: Analysis of geometric attributes of curves and surfaces, 
curves and surfaces for manufacturing applications, CNC program generation from CAD 
models, CNC Program verification and Virtual CNC (8 Lectures) 
5. Additive Manufacturing: Introduction , Process flow in AM, Classification, Issues in RP (4 
Lectures) 
6. Computer  Aided  Process  Planning  (CAPP):  General  Concepts,  Manual  process  
planning, Framework for CAPP,  Computer Aided Assembly Planning,  Representation of 
assembly and assembly plan s, Generation of assembly plans and sequence, Integration 
with CAD systems (4 Lectures) 
7. Computer Aided Inspection: General Concepts, Contact and Non-contact inspection 
techniques, Coordinate Measuring Machine, Machine Vision, Reverse Engineering (6 
Lectures)  
Laboratory Experiments:  
Manual  part  programming  on  CNC  lathe  and  CNC  millin g  machines  using  CNC simulation 
software;  Application of various canned cycles in programming;  Machine setting on CNC lathe 
and  CNC  vertical  milling  machine;  Representing  free  form  curves  on  CAD/CAM  software; 
Generation  of  part  programs  from  CAD/CAM  software  for  CNC  Lathe  and  milling  
machines; Computer Aided Inspection (CMM); On -machine inspection of components; 
Importance of data exchange formats such as IGES, STEP, DMIS etc. 
Reference Books: 
1) Smid P. (2008), CNC Programming Handbook, Industrial Press 
2) Madison  J (1996),  CNC  Machining  Handbook:  Basic  Theory,  Production  Data  and  
Machining Procedures, Industrial Press 
3) Marciniak  K. (1991),  Geometric  Modeling  for  Numerically  Controlled  Machining, 
Oxford University Press 
  
16 
 
 
  
Title Mechanical Metallurgy   Course No. MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3-0-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Program Elective 
Pre-requisite  
 
Objectives 
1. To impart Mechanical Metallurgy concepts and their applications in mechanics and 
manufacturing 
  
Learning Outcomes 
1. Understanding of the basic concepts of Mechanical Metallurgy with emphasis on 
micromechanics of deformation and structure of solids.  
2. Imparting knowledge in two areas of material mechanical behavior: Elastic and plastic 
deformation. 
 
Course Content 
1. Review: Material Properties, Effect of structure on properties at different levels subatomic 
to Macroscopic, Tensile Response of Materials, Scaling issues,  Effect of Temperature on 
Flow Properties Stress State (2D). (6 Lectures)   
2. Selection of Materials:  Selection strategy, selection procedure, structural index, Material 
selection case studies, Shape factors, efficiency of standard sections, Material limits for 
shape factors. (6 Lectures)  
3. Stress Tensor, Stress State (3D), Description of  Strain, Elasticity; Advanced 
Treatment  Plasticity (Yield Criteria for Ductile Metals) (4 Lectures)  
4. Plastic deformation,  Dislocation Theory,  Strengthening Mechanisms,  Metalworking, 
Creep, Metal forming, casting and allied manufacturing processes (12 Lectures) 
5. Basic fracture mechanics, ductile-brittle transition, Toughness, microstructure anisotropy, 
Optimizing microstructures for toughness Environmental assisted cracking (EAC) Variables 
affecting EAC, Introduction to Fatigue, Wear, Corrosion. (12 Lectures) 
 
Textbook:             
1. Dieter, G. E., (1986), Mechanical Metallurgy, McGraw Hill Book Company 
2. Hertzberg, R.W., (2012), Deformation and Fracture Mechanics of Engineering Materials, 
John Wiley and Sons 
3. Ashby, F., (1999), Materials Selection in Mechanical Design, Butterworth –Heinmann 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113106032/ 
17 
 
Title Theory of Arc Welding  Course No. MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3-0-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Program Elective 
Pre-requisite  
 
Objectives 
1. To impart knowledge and train students in area of arc welding processes 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Acquire fundamental understanding of the principles of arc welding 
2. Develop detailed understanding of Arc welding processes and effect of their process 
parameters 
3. Understand  how arc welding processes are selected, controlled, and applied to the 
various joint design requirements and Diagnose faults in arc welding processes and 
acquire basic understanding of the heat flow and residual stresses in welds  
 
Course Content 
Physics of welding arc: - Welding arc, voltage distribution along the arc, thermionic and 
non-thermionic cathodes, arc characteristics and its relationship with power source, arc 
efficiency, heat generation, effect of shielding gases on arc, isotherms of ar cs, 
Classification, forces acting on the drop, metal transfer mechanisms, transition current, 
melting rate, effect of polarity, deposition efficiency, current and voltage oscillograms, 
high speed films. (10 Lectures)  
Consumable electrode welding processes :- Manual metal arc (MMA) welding: type 
composition and functions of flux covering, ISI and other international codes for 
electrodes, concepts of special electrodes, consumables, arc length control in pulsed MIG 
welding, selection of parameters, self-shielded and gas shielded flux cored wire welding.(6 
Lectures) 
Submerged Arc Welding: Specific features, process variables, types and composition of 
fluxes and their manufacturing, arc length control, significance of flux-metal combination; 
Non-Consumable Electrode Welding Processes:- Gas tungsten arc welding, electrodes, 
compositions, shielding gases, arc ignition and maintenance, selection of polarity, arc 
voltage rectification and remedy, cathode spot and normal mode operations. Plasma arc 
welding: transferred and non-transferred plasma arc welding, selection of gases, welding 
parameters, keyhole technique. (10 Lectures) 
Heat flow and Residual Stresses in Welds:- Heat flow in welding, effect of welding 
parameters on heat distribution, Calculation of peak temperature, weld thermal cycle, 
cooling rate and solidification time, residual stress distribution, influence of residual stress 
in static and dynamic loading. (14 Lectures) 
 
Reference Books 
1. Messler R. W., (1999), Principles of Welding (Processes, Physics, Chemistry and 
Metallurgy), John Wiley 
2. Metals Handbook, Vol. 6, (1993),  ASM International Publication 
3. Welding Handbook Vol. 1, 2 & 3, (1991),  American Welding Society 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. http://nptel.ac.in/courses/112107089/ 
 
  
18 
 
Title Welding Metallurgy Course No. MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3-0-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Program Elective 
Pre-requisite  
 
Objectives 
1. To provide students understanding of the metallurgical principles involved in welding of 
ferrous and non-ferrous metals and alloys and to provide knowledge on dissimilar metal 
welding. 
 
Learning Outcomes   
1. To enable understanding and effective application of physical metallurgy principles to 
non-equilibrium thermo-mechanical conditions associated with welding. 
2. Facilitate understanding and familiarity of the joining of dissimilar metal welds. 
3. Understanding of the basic fundamentals, techniques and processes suitable for 
welding non-ferrous alloys. 
 
Course Content 
 
1. Application of physical metallurgy principles to non -equilibrium thermo -mechanical 
conditions associated with welding. (6 Lectures) 
2. Heat flow in welding, chemical reactions in welding, Fluid flow and metal evaporation in 
welding. (10 Lectures) 
3. Fusion zone, Partially melted zone, Heat affected zone, Weld solidification principles, 
Chemical Inhomogenities and cracking. (12 Lectures) 
4. Welding of stainless steels, aluminum alloys, copper alloys and Nickel alloys, Joining 
of Dissimilar metal welds. (12 Lectures) 
 
Reference Books 
1. Sindo Kuo, (2002), Welding Metallurgy, Second Edition, Wiley 
2. Easterling K.E., (1992), Introduction to the physical metallurgy of welding,  
Butterworths 
3. Lippold J. C. and Kotecki D. J., (2005), Welding Metallurgy and W eldability of 
Stainless steels, Wiley  
Self Learning Material  
1. http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113106082/  
 
 
  
19 
 
Title MEMS & Microsystems Technology Number MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–2-0 [4] 
Offered for  Type Program 
Elective 
Prerequisite  
Objectives  
The instructor will : 
1. cover fundamental understanding of miniaturization and related functional 
advantages in various engineering disciplines and corresponding systems/devices  
2. teach overview/working principles, modeling, analysis, design, manufacture and 
packaging of Microsystems along with the state of the art awareness of this domain 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have : 
1. practical and simulation exposure to understand the complexity in design and 
manufacturing of Microsystems. 
2. basic Microsystems based research and training to develop Micro-systems modules 
for commercial and futuristic applications. 
Contents: 
1. Introduction : Fundamentals and applications to Microsystems (2 lectures) 
2. Engineering Mechanics For Microsystems Design: Static Bending of Thin Plates, 
Mechanical Vibration, Thermo-mechanics, Thin-Film Mechanics, Stress Analysis 
Problems (4 lectures) 
3. Fluid Mechanics at small scales: Viscosity of Fluids, Basic Equations in Continuum 
Fluid Dynamics, Incompressible Fluid Flow in Micro-conduits (3 lectures) 
4. Heat Conduction in Solids: General Principle of Heat Conduction, Fourier law of Heat 
Conduction, Newton‟s Cooling Law, Solid-Fluid Interaction, Heat Conduction in 
Multilayered Thin Films (3 lectures) 
5. Scaling Laws in Miniaturization (3 lectures)  
6. Materials for MEMS and Microsystems: Silicon as Substrate Material, Silicon 
Compounds, Gallium Arsenide, Quartz, Polymers, Packaging Materials, polymer  
MEMS (4 lectures) 
7. Microsystems Fabrication Processes: Photolithography, micro molding/replica 
molding process, 3D printing for polymer processing, Diffusion, Oxidation, 
Chemical/Physical Vapor Deposition, Deposition by Epitaxy, Etching, Bulk and 
Surface Micro manufacturing. (8 lectures) 
8. Characterization techniques: Overview of various visualization techniques such as 
FESEM, TEM, Optical microscope etc. (3 lectures) 
9. Working Principles of Microsystems Devices: Working Principles, Design, 
Manufacturing and Packaging of Micro-sensors, Actuators,  Inertial Sensors and 
Fluidic devices (8 lectures) 
10. Microsystems Design Considerations: Selection of Materials, Manufacturing 
Processes, Signal Transduction, processing with respect to microsystem Packaging, 
modeling & simulation aspects (4 lectures) 
Laboratory Experiments:  
Design and development of micro channel/features with soft lithography; Development of 
micro-features with the help of  electrodeposition; Design and fabrication of micro system 
device; Design and testing of micro fluidics device through diffusion and capillary action; 
Silicon wafer handling, RCA cleaning and surface effect analysis with  plasma treatment; 
Modeling and analysis of MEMS based Device such as Capacitive Pressure Sensor, Micro-
Inertial Sensors, Micro actuators, Studies based on Fluid Structure Interaction (FSI); 
Simulation studies on Wet Etching in Anisotropic condition, Meshing and Analysis based on 
Process Simulation Result, Coupled Package-Device Modeling  
Reference Books 
Tai-Ran, H. (2002). MEMS & microsystems: design and manufacture. ME Series. 
Madou, M. J. (2002). Fundamentals of Micro-fabrication: the science of miniaturization. 
CRC 
Campbell, S. A. (2001). The Science and Engineering of Microelectronic Fabrication (The 
Oxford Series in Electrical and Computer Engineering). 
Online Course Material:  
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117105082/ 
 
20 
 
Title Precision and Micro Manufacturing Number MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Program 
Elective 
Prerequisite  
 
Objectives  
The instructor will :  
1. teach important topics in precision, micro/nano manufacturing based on the 
fundamentals enabling technologies.    
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. understand the design and process issues associated with precision machine 
tools and the fabrication of precision components 
2. develop a conceptual design solution to a precision machine operating in the 
small scale range 
3. understand various fabrication techniques in manufacturing micrometer scaled 
devices and systems of complicated geometry 
 
Contents: 
1. Introduction to Precision engineering and practices: definitions, sources of error 
(4 Lectures) 
2. Basic concepts of machining and precision engineering: Machine tool variables- 
accuracy, repeatability, stiffness, spindle vibration, flatness, straightness, and 
smoothness of motion, 1-2 DOF systems, feedback variables, cutting tool 
variables, workpiece variables, environment effects and thermal errors. Machine 
design for precision manufacturing, principles of measurement mechanical 
errors. (5 Lectures) 
3. Micro machining techniques: Diamond micromachining introduction, diamond as 
a tool material, compatible materials, diamond performance, diamond 
machining, micro-mechanical applications. Micro-ECM, micro-EDM, Micromilling: 
micro-milling tools, process results and micro-milling applications. Microdrilling: 
micro-drilling and macro-drilling techniques. Laser micromachining: laser optics, 
laser ablation, heat affected zone and laser polymerization. (16 Lecture) 
4. Joining Processes: Joining processes in similar and dissimilar materials; welding 
processes like ultrasonic, electron beam, laser beam and associated applications. 
(5 Lectures) 
5. Micro casting: casting processes like vacuum, semi-solid state; applications 
processing of integrated circuits, clean rooms, crystal growing and shaping of 
wafers, etching, photo and other lithography techniques, impurity introduction, 
thermal oxidation, CVD etc. (12 Lectures) 
 
Reference Books 
1. Murthy R. L., Precision engineering manufacturing, New Age International, 2005 
2. Suryaprakash M. V., Precision Engineering, Narosa publications  
3. Venkatesh V. C., Precision Engineering, McGraw Hill Publications  
4. Nakazawa H., ”Principles of precision engineering”,  Oxford University Press  
 
Self-Learning Material: 
1. http://library1.org/_ads/A893BCE522D62C29FFB1D4CED8405ED4 
2. https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/112104028/ 
 
  
21 
 
Title Applied Ergonomics Number MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3–0–0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Program Elective 
Prerequisite  
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. teach about Human -Machine system, work study, Physical Ergonomics, Cognitive 
Ergonomics, Biomechanics, Physical Work Environment and Occupational Safety & 
Health 
 
Learning Outcomes  
Students will be able to  
1. correlate the understanding of this subject with their day to day activities and will be 
aware of concepts related to enhance human as well as overall system efficie ncy. The 
course syllabus is designed so as to cover work physiology, Engineering aspect of 
product, improvement in the cognitive capabilities etc. 
2. analyze the factors responsible for decreasing the system performance and work on 
those aspects, thereby making an efficient system. 
 
Contents: 
 
1. Introduction : Overview of Ergonomics, Introduction to human -machine system (2 
lectures) 
2. Physical ergonomics : Work Physiology, Musculoskeletal system, Metabolism & digestive 
system, Cardiovascular system, Respiratory system (8 lectures) 
3. Anthropometry: Design principles, Collection of data & statistical tools (8 lectures) 
4. Cognitive ergonomics: Human Sensory system, Perception, Attention resources, 
Memory, Common Cognitive tasks (8 lectures) 
5. Physical work environment: Visu al environment, Physics of light, Visibility & visual 
performance Lighting system, Auditory environment, Effect noise & permissible noise, 
Noise control, Climate control, Thermoregulation, Heat stress & cold stress (8 lectures)  
6. Biomechanics aspect and work  study : Anatomical sites important for occupational 
ergonomics, manual work system, tools and techniques for work systems design and 
assessment (4 lectures) 
7. Industrial/organizational ergonomics : Occupational Safety & Health, Case studies over 
industrial problems (4 lectures) 
 
Reference Books: 
 
1. Bridger R. S., (2008), Introduction to Ergonomics, 3rd edition, CRC Press 
2. Wickens C. D., (2003), An Introduction to Human Factors Engineering , 2nd edition, 
Pearson   
3. David C. A. (1986) The practice and management of  Industrial Ergonomics , Prentice 
Hall 
 
 Online Course Material: 
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/nptel_download.php?subjectid=112104222 
 
 
  
22 
 
Title Mechatronics System Design Number MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3–0–0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Program Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The instructor will: 
1. focus on essential elements of Mechatronics System Design i.e. Physical Systems 
Modeling, Sensors and Actuators, Signals and Transducers, Logic Systems and Data 
Acquisition  
2. train students in systems design from the functional capability point of view and also to 
provide fundamental understanding of blended functionality of the subsystems combined 
with system sizing 
.    
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. demonstrate various fundamental aspects of Mechatronics Systems Design having 
complexity of interdisciplinary technologies including electrical, mechanical, computer 
science, pneumatics, and thermodynamics engineering 
 
Contents: 
1. Introduction to Mechatronics : Mechatronics in manufacturing, products and in 
engineering design, System Interfacing, Instrumentation and Control Systems,  
Microprocessor-Based Controllers and Microelectronics. (8 lectures) 
2. Physical System Modeling : Modeling Electromechanical Systems , Structures and 
Materials, Modeling of Mechanical Systems for Mechatronics Applications ,  Fluid Power 
Systems, Electrical Engineering,  Engineering Thermodynamics,  Numerical Simulation, 
Modeling and Simulation for MEMS , Rotational and Translational Microelectromechanical 
Systems: MEMS Synthesis, Microfabrication, Analysis, and Optimization ,  Physical Basis 
of Analogies in Physical System Models. (14 lectures) 
3. Mechatronic Sensors and Actuators :  I ntroduction to Sensors and  Actuators,  
Fundamentals of Time and Frequency ,  Sensor and Actuator Characteristics ,  Sensors, 
Linear and Rotational Sensors , Acceleration Sensors , Force Measurement , Torque and 
Power Measurement ,  Flow Measurement , Temperature Measurements ,  Distance 
Measuring and Proximity Sensors , Light Detection, Image, and Vision Systems . 
Actuators : Electromechanical Actuators , Electrical Machines ,  Piezoelectric Actuators ,  
Hydraulic and Pneumatic  Actuation Systems. Discussion with research articles. Problem 
solving based on drives, mechanisms and other mechatronics systems. (20 lectures) 
 
Reference Books 
1. Shetty, D., and Kolk, R. A. (2010). Mechatronics system design, SI version. Cengage 
Learning 
2. Bishop, R. H. (Ed.). (2008). Mechatronic systems, sensors, and actuators. CRC press 
3. Bradley, D. (2018). Mechatronics: electronics in products and processes. Routledge 
 
 
Online Course Material: 
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112103174/ 
 
 
  
23 
 
 
Title Additive Manufacturing Number MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3–0–0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Program Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. cover scientific as well as technological aspects of various additive, subtractive and 
formative rapid manufacturing processes. 
2. cover wide range of contemporary methodologies/technologies and tools for rapid 
manufacturing. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. appreciate process flow and working principles for various additive manufacturing 
processes 
2. deal with challenges faced during additive manufacturing of components 
 
Contents  
1. Introduction: Mass production and customization, Classification of processes, process 
chain for AM (4 Lectures) 
2. Data Preparation: Data formats, data conversion, data validity checks, data repair (4 
Lectures) 
3. Process Planning Stage: Slicing Algorithms, Part Depositions and Orientation, Direct 
Slicing, STEP related details (6 Lectures) 
4. AM Processes: FDM of polymers, metals and ceramics, Laminated Object 
manufacturing, Shaped Deposition m anufacturing, Sterolithography and liquid based 
systems, Laser Sintering technologies, 3 -D Printing, Direct Metal Deposition, Electron 
and Laser beam technologies, Subtractive and Formative Rapid manufacturing 
processes (14 Lectures) 
5. Rapid Tooling (2 Lectures)  
6. Hybrid Processes (4 Lectures) 
7. Process Selection, Applications, Capabilities and Challenges (8 Lectures)  
 
Reference Books  
1. Gibson, I, Rosen, D W, and Stucker, B, Additive Manufacturing Methodologies: Rapid 
Prototyping to Direct Digital Manufacturing, Springer 
2. Hopkinson, N, Haque, R, and Dickens, P, Rapid Manufacturing: An Industrial Revolution 
for a DigitalAge: An Industrial Revolution for the Digital Age, Wiley 
3. Bartolo,P J (editor),Virtual and Rapid Manufacturing: Advanced Research in Virtual and 
Rapid Prototyping, Taylor and Francis 
4. Chua, C K, Leong, K F, Lim C S, Rapid Prototyping, World Scientific 
 
Online Course Material: 
1. https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/112104156/ 
  
24 
 
Title Design for X Number MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3–0–0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Program Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. demonstrate the importance of integrating design and manufacturing to optimize 
production cost, quality and flexibility 
2. discuss topics related to design for quality and reliability along with approaches 
towards robust design 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Understand the impact of manufacturing constraints on product design and process 
planning 
2. understand factors controlling production rate and influence the quality, cost and 
flexibility of manufacturing processes and systems. 
 
Contents  
1. Introduction: Need identification and problem definition, Concept gene ration and 
evaluation, embodiment design (4 Lectures) 
2. Selection of Materials and Shapes: Properties of engineering materials, Selection of 
materials (with examples and case studies), selection of shapes, Co -selection of 
materials and shapes (8 Lectures) 
3. Selection of Manufacturing processes: Overview of manufacturing processes, Design for 
Casting, Design for bulk deformation and sheet metal processes, Design for Machining, 
Design for Polymer and powder processing, Case studies (16 Lectures) 
4. Design for Assemb ly: Review of Assembly operations, Design for Welding, Soldering, 
Brazing and Adhesive joining, Design for heat treatment, Case Studies (8 Lectures) 
5. Design for Reliability and Quality: Failure Mode and Effect Analysis, Design for Quality, 
Design for Reliability, Approach to robust design, Design for optimization (6 Lectures) 
 
Reference Books: 
1) Dieter G., Engineering Design - a materials and processing approach, McGraw Hill  
2) Ashby M. F., Material Selection in Mechanical Design, Butterworth-Heinemann 
3) Boothroyd G., Dewhurst P., and Knight W., Product Design for Manufacture and 
Assembly, John Wiley 
4) Bralla J. G., Handbook for Product Design for Manufacture, McGraw Hill  
 
Online Course Material: 
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/107103012/ 
2. https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/mechanical-engineering/2-008-design-and-manufacturing-
ii-spring-2004/ 
 
  
25 
 
Title Theory of Vibrations Number MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3–0–0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech (ME), M.Tech (AMD) and PhD Type Program Elective 
Prerequisite Basic knowledge of mechanical vibrations   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide the approach adopted for analyzing the structural dynamic characteristics 
and dynamic response of uniform and non-uniform structural elements, like beams.  
2. The approach is applicable for structural dynamic analysis of any structure  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Analyze the vibration characteristics of non-uniform beams  
2.  Thorough understanding of approximate methods used in the structural dynamic 
analysis 
 
Contents  
1. Introduction: Discrete and continuous systems, SDOF, Types of Damping, 
Frequency response, Time response, Beating phenomenon, Response to impulse 
loading, Convolution integral, Numerical integration, Newmark -β method, Wilson -θ 
method (9 Lectures) 
2. Rayleigh‟s Method: Appr oximate evaluation of natural frequency, improved 
Rayleigh‟s method (4 Lectures) 
3. Stiffness and flexibility influence coefficients, finite element stiffness of beam 
elements,  Static condensation (5 Lectures) 
4. Hamilton‟s principle, Lagrange‟s equations (3 Lectures) 
5. Linear conservative natural systems: Symmetric eigenvalue problem, Modal 
analysis, Systems with proportional damping, structural damping (complex 
stiffness) (4 Lectures) 
6. Continuous parameter systems: Longitudinal vibration of bars, bending vibration of 
beams, torsion vibration (4 Lectures) 
7. Differential Eigenvalue Problem: Admissible function, Comparison function, Eigen 
function (2 Lectures) 
8. Positive definite system, self adjoint property (2 Lectures) 
9. Natural modes of vibration: Mode shapes and natural frequencies (2 Lectures) 
10. Approximate methods: Transfer Matrix method, Rayleigh‟s quotient, Rayleigh-Ritz 
method, Galerkin method (5 Lectures) 
11. Response to excitation: Mode summation, Mode acceleration (2 Lectures) 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Meirovitch, L., Principles and Techniques of Vibrations, 3rd Edition, Prentice Hall 
2. Meirovitch, L., Analytical Methods in Vibration Analysis, Macmillan 
3. Clough, R.W., and Penzien, J., Dynamics of Structures, McGraw Hill 
 
Self Learning Material: 
1) https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105101006/ 
   
26 
 
 
Title Mechanical Vibrations Number MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3–0–0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Program Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide the fundamentals of vibration of discrete systems, influence of damping 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Analyze the vibration characteristics of discrete systems  
2. Thorough understanding of modeling of damping and their effects on system response 
 
Contents  
1. Introduction (1 Lecture) 
2. Single degree of freedom systems: Undamped free and forced vibration, Types of 
damping, Viscous, Friction, Hysteretic damping (10 Lectures) 
3. Damped single degree of freedom: Frequency response, resonance Beating 
phenomenon (5 Lectures) 
4. Vibration under general forcing condition, Duhamel Integral (5 Lectures) 
5. Vibration measuring instruments (5 Lectures) 
6. Response spectrum or Shock spectrum (2 Lectures) 
7. Two-degrees of freedom system (2 Lectures) 
8. Free vibration of undamped systems: Normal modes, Orthogonality of modes, 
Expansion theorem (5 Lectures) 
9. Modal analysis (2 Lectures) 
10. Vibration control: Vibration isolation, vibration absorber (3 Lectures) 
11. String vibration (2 Lectures) 
 
Textbook   
1. Thompson, W.T., Theory of Vibration with Applications, Prentice Hall 
2. Rao, S.S., Mechanical Vibrations Prentice Hall 
3. Meirovitch, L., Elements of vibration analysis, Prentice Hall 
 
Self Learning Material: 
1) nptel.ac.in/courses/112103112/ 
 
 
  
27 
 
Title Helicopter Dynamics Number MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3–0–0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Program Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
1.  Provide fundamentals of helicopter dynamics  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Provide basic understanding of the helicopter modeling and flight dynamics  
 
Contents:  
1. Historical development (1 Lecture) 
2. Configurations of helicopters, rotor system (1 Lecture) 
3. Flight control mechanism (1 Lecture) 
4. Momentum theory and blade element theory in hover, Vertical flight and forward 
flight (13 Lectures) 
5. Idealization of rotor blades (2 Lecture) 
6. Flap, lag and torsional dynamics of rotor blade (7 Lectures) 
7. Flap-pitch, lag-pitch and flap-lag coupling (3 Lectures) 
8. Trim and equilibrium analysis (3 Lectures) 
9. Aero-elastic stability of rotor blades (4 Lectures) 
10.  Simple model of rotor fuselage dynamics  (3 Lecture) 
11.  Longitudinal and lateral stability and control of helicopters (4 Lecture)  
 
Reference Books  
1. Venkatesan, C., Fundamentals of Helicopter Dynamics, Taylor and Francis, CRC 
Press 
2. Johnson, W., Helicopter Theory, Princeton University Press 
3. Leishman, G., Principles of Helicopter Aerodynamics, Cambridge University Press  
 
Self Learning Material: 
1. Venkatesan, C., http:// nptel.ac.in/courses/101104017/ 
 
 
  
28 
 
Title Modelling and Control of 
Mechanical Systems 
Number  MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-
Th [C] 
3–0–0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Program Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Familiarize with methods to characterize dynamical behaviour of mechanical system using the 
models 
2. Provide understanding of basic concepts of control theory, along with the various control 
structures & elements 
3. Describe a few techniques for designing control systems 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to: 
1. Develop necessary mathematical models from the knowledge of the mechanical engineering 
discipline, and become familiar with various strategies for their representation and solution  
2. Set up a suitable control structure and acquire clarity about various control tasks and the 
corresponding elements to achieve the tasks 
3. Interpret the closed-loop control design requirements in terms of simpler quantitative 
attributes and apply the design procedures to arrive at the required control scheme 
 
Contents 
1. Introduction to Modelling & Representation: Objective, basic modeling concepts & types of 
models, Models of simple physical systems, linearization of nonlinear models and role of Linear 
Time Invariant (LTI) forms, I/O form, block diagram representation and manipulation, signal 
flow graphs, Laplace transform and transfer function concept (8 Lectures) 
2. Response & Stability Analyses:  Test signals, response of 1st and 2nd order, as well as, higher 
order syst ems, Stability / its connection to response, asymptotic and BIBO stability, role of 
characteristic roots, Routh‟s stability criterion & procedure (6 Lectures) 
3. Introduction to Control: Control objectives, open/ closed loop control and structures, unity 
negative feedback systems, and basic control actions, Transient & steady -state responses, 
tracking & transient response features (5 Lectures) 
4. Proportional Control as Basic Action: Proportional control action, relative stability and response, 
concept of roo t locus and its application to proportional, PI, PD and PID control actions (6 
Lectures) 
5. Concept of Frequency Response: Frequency response & its representation using bode‟, Nyquist 
plots, Nyquist stability analysis, concepts of gain & phase crossover, gain  and phase margins, 
bandwidth and resonant amplitude as closed-loop system attributes (8 Lectures) 
6. Design of Control Elements: Design of P, PI, PD & PID control elements using both root locus 
and frequency response techniques, Design of lead, lag and lag -lead compensators using both 
root locus and frequency response techniques (9 Lectures) 
 
Text Book 
1. Ogata, K., Modern Control Engineering, 5th Edition, Prentice-Hall India, (EEE) 
 
Reference Books 
1. Nise, N.S., Control Systems Engineering, 6th Edition, John-Wiley India, (WSE) 
2. Gopal,M., Control Systems - Principles & Design, 3rd Edition, Tata McGraw-Hill 
3. Dorf, R.C. & Bishop, R.H., Modern Control Systems, 11th Edition, Pearson 
 
Self Learning Maerial  
1. https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc17_ee12/preview 
 
 
  
29 
 
Course Title Multibody Dynamic Systems Course No. MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3–0–0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Program Elective 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
1. To understand various abstractions in dynamics of rigid bodies to model real-life problems 
in mechanisms, robotics and vehicles 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Understanding the basic concepts of classical rigid body dynamics and robotics 
2. Formulation of equations of motion and their solution  
3. Applications in the area of robotics and mechanisms and vehicles  
 
Course Content 
Multibody systems, reference frames, constrained motion, kinematics, Euler angles, Denavit-
Hartenberg notation, Relationship among various conventions (8 Lectures) 
Analytical techniques, generailized co-ordinates, generalized forces, Lagrangian dynamics, 
calculus of variations, Newton-Euler equations (10 Lectures) 
Mechanics of deformable bodies, formulation of equation of motion for multibody systems with 
deformable components, compliant mechanisms (12 Lectures) 
Finite element method, variational formulation, discretization procedures, element shape 
functions, formulation of mass, stiffness matrices and their assembly for various boundary 
conditions and solution methodologies (12 Lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. Shabana., A. A., Dynamics of Multibody Systems,  Cambridge University Press, 4 th 
Edition 
2. Reddy., J. N., An Introduction to the Finite Element Method, Tata McGraw Hill, 3 rd 
Edition 
 
Self Learning Maerial  
1. http://real.uwaterloo.ca/~mbody/ 
 
  
30 
 
Course Title Finite Element Methods in 
Engineering 
Course No. MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3–0–0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Program Elective 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
1. Understand the fundamental ideas and concepts of the FEM 
2. Understand and perform engineering analysis of mechanical systems & civil structures, fluid 
mechanics and heat transfer 
3. Understand the need in design for the Finite Element Method 
Learning Outcomes 
1. To achieve an understanding of the fundamentals of the FEA 
2. Ability to develop the governing FE equations for systems (Mechanical, Civil, and Aerospace)  
3. Ability to successfully use of the basic finite elements for structural applications using truss, 
beam, frame, and plane elements;  
4. Ability to use FEA for fluid mechanics and heat transfer problems. 
5. Ability to formulate two-dimensional and three-dimensional elements in FEA design process 
 
Course Content 
1. Historical background: General procedure for finite element analysis ; Comparison between 
FEM solution and exact solution; Stiffness matrix, Spring and bar elements;   Finite element 
formulation of axial rod and beam problems (6 lectures) 
2. Stiffness Method Introduction, Element Transformation, Boundary conditions, Constraint  
forces, Global stiffness matrix, Element strain and stress, Three Dimensional Trusses and 
Frames (6 lectures) 
3. Elementary beam theory, Flexure element stiffness matrix, Boundary conditions, constraint 
forces, Global stiffness matrix, General three dimensional beam element (5 lectures) 
4. Completeness and compatibility, Concept of interpolation functions, Polynomial forms,   
geometric isotropic; Triangular, rectangular and three -dimensional elements;   Isoparametric 
formulation,   axisymmetric elements;   Numer ical  Integration,   Gaussian Quadrature (5 
lectures) 
5. One dimensional Conduction with and without  convection;   Heat transfer in  2D dimensions;   
Heat Transfer with mass  transport;   Heat Transfer in 3D dimensions;   Time -dependent Heat 
Transfer (5 lectures) 
6. Governing equations for incompressible flow; Fluid mechanics in 2 -D flow,   Incompressible 
viscous flow (5 lectures) 
7. Basic  Equations;   Boundary Conditions;   FEM Formulation;   Shape Functions;   Numerical  
Evaluation of Elements Matrices and Vecto rs;   Global matrices; Boundary conditions and 
solutions;   General 3D stress element (5 lectures) 
8. Thin plate formulation;   Various thin plate elements; Thick plate formulation (5 lectures)  
9. Vibration of a rod;   Vibration of a beam;   Classification of pa rtial differential equations;   
Time response of parabolic equations; Forced vibration problems (6 lectures) 
 
Reference Books 
1. Cook R.  D., Concepts and Applications of Finite Element Analysis, John Wiley 
2. Bathe K.  J., Finite Element Procedures in Engineering Analysis, Prentice-Hall 
3. Moaveni S., Finite Element Analysis - Theory and Application with ANSYS, Prentice Hall 
4. Hutton D., Fundamental of Finite Element Analysis, McGraw-Hill 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112104205/ 
2. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105105041/ 
 
  
31 
 
Course Title Rotor Dynamics Course No. ME7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3–0–0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Program Elective 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
1. To impart the concepts, principles and fundamental understanding of the rotor 
dynamics phenomena 
2. To understand the modeling and analysis of rotors for the transverse and torsional 
vibrations. 
3. To study the condition monitoring of rotor bearing system for analyzing the 
performance of rotating machinery 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. The students become familiar with the fundamental aspect of the dynamics of rotating 
machines 
2. Ability to identify and detect the rotor bearing system parameters  
3. Ability to use in futuristi c model-based condition monitoring and fault diagnostic and 
prognostics 
4. Be acquainted with the different techniques used in the industry for the analysis of 
rotor-dynamic problems. 
 
Course Content 
1. Review of dynamic principles using matrix algebra; Critical  speeds and dynamic 
response; Stability of rotating components; Gyroscopic effects; Balancing of rotating 
machinery (10 lectures) 
2. Torsional and transverse vibrations; Bearing dynamics and it's coefficient 
measurements (8 lectures) 
3. Hydrodynamic Bearing Instabilities; Sub-Critical Phenomenon in Rotors (8 lectures) 
4. Numerical and experimental studies employing a Jeffcott rotor; Fault Detection and 
analysis; Transducers and monitoring; Condition monitoring and signature analysis of 
Rotating Machines (10 lectures) 
5. Development of complex rotor-dynamic models (8 lectures) 
 
Reference Books 
1. Vance J.M., Rotordynamics of Turbomachinery, John Wiley & Sons 
2. Lee C.-W., Vibration Analysis of Rotors, Kluwer Academic Publishers 
3. Goodwin M.J., Dynamics of Rotor-Bearing Systems, Unwin Hyman 
4. Krämer E.,  Dynamics of Rotors and Foundations, Springer-Verlag 
 
Self Learning Material  
1. https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/112103024/ 
 
  
32 
 
Title Autonomous Mobile Robots Number AVL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3-0-2-0 [4] 
Offered for  Type Program Core 
Prerequisite  
Objectives: 
1. To provide the basics required to develop autonomous mobile robots and systems  
2. Introduce mobile robot locomotion and kinematics, environment perception and modeling, 
localization, mapping and navigation 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. The course will equip students wi th theoretical and practical knowledge of Autonomous 
Mobile Robot. 
  
Contents 
2. Mobile Robots: Introduction, Wheeled robots, Aerial Robots, Legged robots (2 lectures)  
3. Robot Kinematics: Kinematic Model and Constraints, Maneuverability, Workspace, Motion 
control (6 lectures) 
4. Perception: Sensors for mobile robots, wheel, Heading, Accelerometers, IMU, Ground 
beacons, Fundamental of Computer Vision, Image Processing, Feature Extraction, Place 
Recognition, Extraction based on Range Data (11 lectures) 
5. Robot Loc alization:  Noise and Aliasing, Belief Representation, Map Representations, 
Probabilistic Map based localization, Autonomous Map Building (11 lectures) 
6. Planning and Navigation: Planning and Reacting, Path Planning, Obstacle Avoidance, 
Navigation Architectures (8 lectures) 
7. Application to Industry 4.0: Role of Internet of Things, Autonomous Transport, Material 
Handling and Logistics (3 Lectures) 
  
Laboratory Experiments 
Kinematics, Motion Control, Sensor Integration, Localization, Autonomous Map building, 
Path Planning, Obstacle Avoidance, Navigation 
 
Text Books 
1. Siegwart, R., Nourbakhsh, I. R., Scaramuzza, D., & Arkin, R. C. (2011). Introduction to 
autonomous mobile robots. MIT press. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Kelly, A. (2013). Mobile robotics: mathematics, models, and methods. Cambridge 
University Press. 
2. Choset, H. M., Hutchinson, S., Lynch, K. M., Kantor, G., Burgard, W., Kavraki, L. E., & 
Thrun, S. (2005). Principles of robot motion: theory, algorithms, and implementation. MIT 
press. 
3. Thrun, S., Burgard, W., & Fox, D. (2005). Probabilistic robotics. MIT press. 
 
Self Learning Material  
1.  https://www.edx.org/course/autonomous-mobile-robots 
 
  
33 
 
Title Microfluidics Technology Number MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Program Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. teach topics based on the fundamentals of microfluidics enabling technologies.    
2. cover state of the art work performed in the microfluidics domain.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. explain the fundamental of micro fluidics and associated applications. 
2. demonstrate knowledge of designing, fabricating and characterizing a) microfluidics 
components and sensors/actuators, and b) micro total analysis systems. 
3. solve problems related to the fluid transport phenomena at the microscopic length 
scale. 
 
Contents:  
1. Basics to Micro fluidics: Fundamentals to Microfluidics, its commercial and scientific 
aspects,  Device and Technology development, Theory of fluid mechanics at 
miniaturized length scales: Intermolecular forces, continuum mechanics at small scales, 
electrokinetics (electro-osmosis, electrophoresis, dielectrophoresis), Navier strokes 
equation and non dimensionalization, diffusion, mixing, separation in microsystems (14 
Lectures) 
2. Fabrication and Characterization of Microfluidic Devices: Design Considerations, Vacuum 
science and plasmas, Materials for microfluidics technology, Basic fabrication processes 
for polymers, bulk and surface micromachining, replication technologies, laser 
machining, micro-stereo lithography, micro-molding, Assembly and packaging of micro-
systems, Flow characterization: Fundamental physics consideration of Micro-PIV, 
Special processing methods for Micro-PIV recordings, Micro-PIV examples (14 Lectures)  
3. Microfluidics  Technology (14 Lectures)   
(a) Microfluidics Sensors: Description about various microfluidics sensors (thermal flow 
sensors, velocity sensors etc.), design considerations etc.   
(b) Microfluidics Actuators : Micro-valves (Design considerations, Pneumatic valves, 
Thermo-pneumatic valves, Thermo-mechanical valves, Piezoelectric valves, 
Electrostatic valves, Electromagnetic valves, Electrochemical valves, Capillary force 
valves etc.) Mechanical Micro-pumps (design considerations, check valve pumps, 
peristaltic pumps, valveless rectification pumps, rotary pumps, centrifugal pumps, 
ultrasonic pumps). Non-mechanical pumps (Electrical pumps, Surface tension driven 
pumps, Chemical pumps, Magnetic pumps) etc.  
(c) Microfluidics in healthcare and diagnostics: Lab on chip devices, Micro total analysis 
systems, Micro-mixers (design considerations, building and testing).  
 
Reference Books: 
1. Nguyen N. T., Wereley S. T. and Shaegh S. A., (2019), Fundamentals and applications 
of microfluidics, Artech house 
2. Campbell, S. A., (2001), The Science and Engineering of Microelectronic Fabrication, 
The Oxford Series in Electrical and Computer Engineering 
3. Karniadakis, G., Beşkök, A. (2001), Microflows: Fundamentals and Simulation, Springer 
 
Self Learning Material:  
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112105187/     
2. https://freevideolectures.com/course/3495/microfluidics 
 
  
34 
 
 
Title Computer Aided Inspection and 
Quality Control 
Number MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3-0-0-0 
Offered for  Type Program Elective 
Prerequisite  
 
Objectives: 
The instructor will     
1. introduce contact and non-contact techniques for the inspection of components 
2. provide brief understanding about concepts of computer aided quality control   
 
Learning Outcomes: 
The students are expected to  
1. appreciate fundamentals of contact and non -contact inspection techniques along with 
quality control techniques for its implementation in various measurement applications 
 
Contents 
1. Contact Inspection Techniques: Fundamentals, Coordinate Measuring Machine,  
Programming of CMM, Compensation, DMIS file components, Computer Aided Inspection 
Planning, Automatic Feature and  GD&T extraction, Integration of CAD and Inspection 
Planning (14 lectures)  
2. Non-contact Inspection Techniques: Introduction to Machine Vision and its applications, 
Image Acquisition and Digitization techniques, Image Proessing and Analysis Techniques, 
Interpretation of the image data, Optical inspection methods – Comparators, Laser 
Scanners and Linear Arrays, Non -optical methods – Radiation Techniques, Ultrasonic 
methods (14 lectures) 
3. Computer Aided Quality Control: Quality in Design and Manufacturing, Trad itional vs 
Computer Aided Quality control, Process variability and capability, Statistical process 
control, Six Sigma and DMAIC, Taguchi Methods in Quality Engineering, International 
Standards (14 lectures) 
  
 
Reference Books 
1. Al-Ahmari A., Nasr E. A., and Abdulhameed O., (2016), Computer Aided Inspection 
Planning: Theory and Practice, CRC Press 
2. Demant C., Streicher-Abel B., and Waszkewitz P., Industrial Image Processing – Visual 
Quality Control in Manufacturing, Springer 
3. Montgomery D., (2005), Introduction to Statistical Quality Control, John Wiley 
 
  
35 
 
Title Welding: Metallurgy, Defects and 
Testing 
Number MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3-0-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Program Elective 
Prerequisite  
 
Objectives: 
1. The aim of the course is to provide fundamental principles of metallurgy related with 
welding. Knowledge about the welding defects and their testing. 
 
Learning Outcomes: 
1. Understanding about welding Metallurgy 
2. Imparting knowledge about the welding defects and factors responsible for it.  
3. Role of diffusible hydrogen content and residual stresses on mechanical performance 
of the welded joint.  
4. Knowledge about the non-destructive testing of welded joint. 
5. Imparting knowledge about the heat treatment of the welded joint.  
 
Contents: 
1. Fundamentals of physical metallurgy: Need, phase diagrams: Fe -C, Al -Cu, Cu -Zn 
system, Phase transformations in Fe -C system, TTT diagram and CCT diagram, 
Carbon equivalent, Schaffer diagram , relevance of above in welding, delta ferrite 
formation (8 Lectures) 
2. Effect of welding parameters on heat distribution, calculation of peak temperature, 
Residual stresses and shrinkage stresses, influence of stress in static and dynamic 
loading (6 Lectures) 
3. Welding defects (Hot cracking, cold cracking, solidification cracking, nonmetallic 
inclusions; lamellar tearing; hydrogen damage) and non -destructive testing (Visual 
inspection, Liquid penetrant, Magnetic particle, Eddy current, X -ray, Radiographic, 
Ultrasonic testing) (10 Lectures) 
4. Diffusible hydrogen content in deposited metal their measurement, Role of diffusible 
hydrogen on hydrogen induced cracking (2 Lectures) 
5. Metal strengthen approaches: introduction, solid solution strengthening, grain 
refinement, precipitation hardening, transformation hardening, dispersion hardening, 
work hardening, strain aging (4 Lecture) 
6. Heat treatment of weld joint: Need, Annealing; Normalizing; Quenching; Tempering; 
Austempering; Martempering and stress relieving of steel, Precipitation hardening of 
Al and copper alloys, Solidification of weld metal: principle of solidification of weld 
metal, modes of solidification, effect of welding parameter on weld structure, grain 
refinement principle of weld metal, method of weld metal refinement (10 Lecture) 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Lancaster J F., Metallurgy of Welding, Allen & Unwin 
2. Avner S D, Introduction to physical metallurgy, TMH 
3. ASM Handbook Vol. 6, Welding, Brazing and soldering, ASM International 
4. Kou S., Welding metallurgy, 2nd edition, Wiley 
 
  
36 
 
Title Non-Conventional Welding Processes Number MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3-0-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Program Elective 
Prerequisite  
 
Objectives: 
1. The aim of the course is to provide theoretical and practical details of various non -
conventional welding/ joining processes and techniques including high energy density 
welding processes 
 
Learning Outcomes: 
1. Understanding about the non -conventional high -energy density welding processes 
and their application.  
2. Imparting knowledge about solid-state welding processes and safety measurement. 
 
Contents: 
1. High Power Density Welding Processes: Electron Beam welding (EBW) their 
advantages, disvantages, and applications; Laser Welding: Principles, Significance of 
laser welding variables; Laser welding of various materials (8 Lectures) 
2. Solid State Welding Processes : Friction welding, Ultrasonic welding, Explosive 
welding, Induction welding, Forge welding, and Diffusion welding (8 Lectures) 
3. Special Topics: Soldering; brazing, Thermit welding, and braze welding (5 Lectures) 
4. Cutting and Surfacing : Plasma and thermal cutting and surfacing operations; 
parameters; consumables; and equipment; arc and gas gouging (5 Lectures) 
5. Resistance Welding: Principle of contact resist ance; calculation of current, time and 
voltage for spot welding, choice of electrode material; electrode shapes; shunt 
current; shop tests for soundness of spot welds, seam, projection, butt and flash 
welding; selection of welding and other process details ; stud welding; power sources 
for resistance welding (10 Lectures)  
6. Safety measurement for the conventional and non -conventional welding process (4 
Lectures) 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Welding Handbook Vol. 2 & 3, American Welding Society 
2. Metals Handbook, Vol. 6, American Society of Metals 
 
  
37 
 
Title Welding Inspection and Quality 
Control 
Number MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3-0-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Program Elective 
Prerequisite  
 
Objectives: 
1. To provide knowledge of dimensional inspection, destructive testing, NDT methods, 
WPS and PQR requirements and welder qualification standards 
 
Learning Outcomes: 
1. Provide basic knowledge about the welding terminology. 
2. Imparting knowledge about the ASME and AWS standards used for mechanical 
testing of the welded joint. 
3. Imparting knowledge about the welding defects and NDT of welded joints. 
 
Contents: 
1. Introduction: Types and purposes of weldment testing, important welding terms, 
symbols for welding and testing (4 Lectures) 
2. Weld Related Discontin uities: Classification of discontinuities in weldment, 
occurrence, causes and prevention of discontinuities, location, orientation and extent 
of discontinuities, method for testing weld and base metal imperfections (8 Lectures)  
3. Destructive Testing of Welds : Chemical tests, metallographic tests, hardness tests, 
mechanical test for groove and fillet welds -full section, reduced section and all -weld-
metal tensile tests, root, face and side bend tests, fillet weld break tests, fillet weld 
shear strength test (8 Lectures) 
4. Non-Destructive Testing (NDT) of Weldments: Visual inspection, dyepenetrant 
inspection, magnetic particle inspection; Ultrasonic inspection principle of ultrasonic 
testing, types of ultrasonic probes, standard blocks for calibration; Radiographic  
inspection – principle of radiography, X-ray tubes, gamma-ray sources, interpretation 
of radiographs, defect discernibility, neutron radiography; Eddy current inspection; 
Proof test, leak tests: NDT AWS (American Welding Society) standards, safety in NDT 
(15 lectures)  
5. Inspection of Weldments: Duties and requirement of an inspector before, during and 
after welding, codes governing welding inspection, ASME (American Society of 
Mechanical Engineers) Code (5 Lectures) 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Welding Inspection, American Welding Society  
2. Welding Hand Book, Vol. 5, American Welding Society  
3. ASME Code Section IX , ASME 
 
 
 
 
 
  
38 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
M Tech & M Tech - PhD Dual Degree 
 in  
Thermofluids Engineering 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
39 
 
Introduction: 
Thermo-fluids is the combined study of heat transfer, fluid dynamics, thermodynamics, and 
combustion. Thermofluids program at IIT Jodhpur plans to engage in a wide range of research 
activities in the areas such as solar energy, clean water, thermodynamics and fluid dyna mics, heat 
transfer and combustion, with a strong emphasis on the application of computational modeling and 
experimental methods. The thermal sciences area involves studies in energy conversion, the flow 
of liquids and gases, and the transfer of heat by me ans of conduction, convection and radiation. 
The flow and heat transfer are involved in devices and systems for energy conversion. The program 
involves a mix of fundamental courses followed by electives to specialize in the chosen area. 
Further, the projec t component ensures hands -on problem solving skills to enable solving of 
industrial problems as well as undertake research in the different areas of thermofluids. The 
potential employers of graduates from this program will be government and academia, autom otive 
OEMs and ancillary manufacturers, energy sector, chemical and processing industries and others.  
Objective of the Program: 
To develop professionals through analytical and computational skills that enables individual to 
handle research and industrial problems in the domain of Thermofluids engineering 
Expected Graduate Attributes: 
1) Ability to undertake academic and industrial research in the areas of Thermal and Fluids 
Engineering like automobiles, thermal power, nuclear energy, gas turbines, solar energy , 
space science, defence, environmental engineering etc. 
2) Ability to solve problems in design of thermal and fluid equipment/systems using analytical, 
experimental and computational techniques 
3) Equipped to contribute to the multi -physics and interdisciplinary research interfacing with 
thermal and fluid systems 
4) Ability to express ideas in the written and oral formats 
5) Development of appreciation and commitment to professional ethics 
Learning Outcomes: 
At the end of program, a student is expected to have, 
1) Strong fundamentals in incompressible/compressible fluid flow, thermodynamics and heat 
transfer 
2) Analytical, computational and experimental skills to solve problems in multi -scale heat and 
fluid flow 
3) Skills to design, develop and integrate systems/equipment involving heat and fluid flow 
4) Competence to identify and analyze interdisciplinary systems/devices involving thermofluids  
5) Expertise in one of the application areas e.g. solar thermal, combustion, heat exchanger 
design, HVAC systems, aerodynamics, thermal management of electronic systems, high speed 
flows etc.   
6) Skills to communicate technical and scientific ideas in the domai n of Thermal and Fluids 
Engineering 
 
 
  
40 
 
Proposed Course Structure: 
 
Cat. Course Number, 
Course Title 
L-T-P-
Th 
Cr  Cat. Course Number, Course 
Title 
L-T-P-
Th 
Cr 
I Semester  II Semester 
MC MEL7XX0; 
Incompressible Fluid 
Flow 
3-0-0-
0 
3  MC MA: Numerical Methods in 
ODE 
1-0-0-0 1 
MC MEL7XX0: Classical And 
Statistical 
Thermodynamics 
MEL7XX1: Multi Phase 
Systems and Chemical 
Reactions 
MEL7XX2: Kinetic 
Theory  
MEL7XX3: Statistical 
Thermodynamics 
3-0-0-
0 
3  MC MA: Numerical Methods for 
PDE 
1-0-0-0 1 
MC MEL7XX0: Applied Heat 
and Mass Transfer 
3-0-0-
0 
3  MC MEP7XX0: Thermal 
Engineering Lab 
0-0-2-0 1 
MC MEL7XX0: Experimental 
Techniques in 
Thermofluids 
3-0-0-
0 
3  MP Program Elective 3-0-0-0 3 
MC MA: Matrix 
Computations 
1-0-0-
0 
1  MP Program Elective 3-1-0-0 4 
NH HSN7XX0: Technical 
Communication 
1-0-0-
0 
1  MP Program Elective 3-0-2-0 4 
MC MEP7XX0: Fluid 
Engineering Lab 
0-0-2-
0 
1  NH OAL7XX0: Innovation and 
IP Management  
1-0-0-0 1 
Total 15  Total 15 
     
III Semester  IV Semester 
MP MED8XX0: Project 0-0-0-
5 
5  MP MED8XX0: Project 0-0-0-11 11 
ME Program Elective 3-0-0-
0 
3  MO Open Elective 3-0-0-0 3 
ME Program Elective 3-0-0-
0 
3  NH HSN7XX0: Professional 
Ethics 
1-0-0-0 1 
MO Open Elective 3-0-0-
0 
3      
NH OAN7XX0: Systems 
Engineering and Project 
Management 
1-0-0-
0 
1      
Total 15  Total 15 
Grand Total 60 
 
Summary of Course categories for M. Tech (TFE) Programs: 
 
S.N. Course Type Credits 
1 Program Core (MC) 17 
2 Program Elective  (ME) 17 
3 Open Electives (MO) 6 
4 Project (MP) 16 
5 Non-Graded Humanities (NH) 4 
Total 60 
 
 
 
41 
 
Course requirements:  
Core Courses: 
MEL7XX0:Applied Heat and Mass Transfer 
MEL7XX0:Applied Thermodynamics 
MEL7XX0:Experimental Techniques in Thermofluids 
MEL7XX0:Incompressible Fluid Flow 
MEL7XX0:Matrix Computations 
MEL7XX0:Numerical Methods for ODE  
MEL7XX0:Numerical methods for PDE 
MEP7XX0:Fluid Engineering Lab 
MEP7XX0:Thermal Engineering Lab 
 
Elective Courses: 
 
Program Electives: 
  
MEL7XX0: Conduction and Radiation 
MEL7XX0: Convective Heat and Mass Transfer 
MELXXX0: Combustion Technology 
MEL7XX0: Turbulent Flows 
MEL7XX0: Jet and Rocket Propulsion 
MEL7XX0: Computational Fluid Dynamics and Heat Transfer 
MEL7XX0: Two Phase Flow and Heat Transfer 
MEL7XX0: Design of Heat Exchange Equipment 
MEL7XX0: Compressible Fluid Flows 
MEL7XX0: Optical and Laser Based Measurements in Thermofluids 
MEL7XX0: Fluid dynamics and Acoustics of Turbulent Jets 
MEL7XX0: Heating, Ventilation and Air-Conditioning 
 
General Electives:  
 
MEL7XX0: Microfluidics Technology 
MEL7XX0: Fluid Flow in Biological Processes 
MEL7XX0: Nanosensors 
MEL7XX0: Water Energy Nexus 
MEL7XX0: Soil and Water Conservation Engineering 
MEL7XX0: Probabilistic Methods in Engineering Design 
  
42 
 
Core Courses: 
Title Incompressible Fluid Flow Number MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3-0-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Program Core 
Prerequisite  
 
Objectives 
1. To provide a deeper and more thorough grounding in principles and basic applications of 
fluid mechanics to Mechanical Engineering students. 
2. Enhanced understanding of fluid dynamics, including the equations of motion in differential 
and integral form. 
3. Through exposure to the concepts of Boundary layer, turbulence etc. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Ability to predict and solve enginee ring problems using conservation of mass and 
momentum. 
2. Enhanced analytical ability in solving multi-scale fluid mechanics problems 
3. For an application involving fluid mechanics, be able to utilize a commercial CFD software 
program in the problem solution.  
 
Contents: 
1. Introduction: definition of compressibility, incompressible and compressible flows (2 
Lectures) Review on vector calculus and tensors (2 Lectures)  
2. Fluid kinematics; stress -deformation relation (2 Lectures), stream function, potential 
function, vorticity and circulation (2 Lectures); Equations of fluid motion: Integral and 
differential approaches (1 Lecture), Euler equation for inviscid flows and Bernoulli‟s equation 
(2 Lectures), Navier -Stokes equations for viscous flows (2 Lectures); Exact solu tions: 
Couette flow (2 Lecture), Hagen -Poiseuille flow (1 Lecture), flow through circular pipes (2 
Lectures)  
3. Vorticity Dynamics: Kelvin‟s circulation theorem (2 Lectures), Vorticity transport equation (2 
Lectures) 
4. Irrotational flows: potential theory for elementary flows (3 Lectures), application of complex 
variables in Irrotational flows (2 Lectures) 
5. Boundary layer theory: Von -Karman integral equation (2 Lectures), Blassius solution (1 
Lecture), effect of pressure gradient, separation and control (1 Lecture)  
6. Flow instability: concept of small -perturbations (1 Lecture), linearized stability of parallel 
viscous flows (2 Lectures), Orr-Sommerfeld equation (2 Lectures) 
7. Introduction to turbulence: Reynolds averaged Navier -Stokes equation (1 Lecture), 
turbulent kinetic energy and dissipation (1 Lecture), fully developed turbulent flow through 
a pipe and channel, universal law of wall,  effect of wall roughness (2 Lectures) 
8. Introduction to compressible flows (3 Lectures) 
 
Reference Books 
1. Kundu P. K., Kohen I. M, and Dowling D. R (2014), Fluid Mechanics, Academic Press  
2. White F. M. (2015), Fluid Mechanics, McGraw Hill  
3. Karamchety K. (1980), Principles of Ideal-Fluid Aerodynamics, Krieger 
 
 
Self-Learning Material 
1. http://web.mit.edu/hml/ncfmf.html 
 
 
  
43 
 
 
Title Classical and Statistical 
Thermodynamics 
Number MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3-0-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Program Core 
Prerequisite  
 
Objectives 
1. To enhance the understanding of thermodynamics principles and their relevance to the 
problems of humankind; provide the student with experience in applying thermodynamic 
principles to predict physical phenomena and to solve engineering problems. 
2. Providing exposure to the fundamental of statistical thermodynamics and enhance the 
familiarity of the students with immerging statistical methods like Lattice -Boltzmann 
method, Molecular dynamics simulation to solve relevant engineering problems.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Ability to solve engineering problems using energy and exergy based thermodynamics 
principles. 
2. Ability to appreciate and use statistical tools for solving micro and meso -scale 
thermodynamic problems 
 
Contents 
1. Multiphase Systems and Chemical Reactions (fractal 1): [MEL7XX1] [1-0-0] 
Review of first and second law of thermodynamics, Maxwell relations, Joule -Thompson 
experiment, exergy analysis, Third law of thermodynamics (5 Lectures) 
Phase transition, types of equilibrium and stability, multi-component and multi -phase 
systems, equations of state (4 Lectures) 
chemical thermodynamics, combustion (5 Lectures) 
 
2. Kinetic Theory (fractal 2): [MEL7XX2] [1-0-0] 
Kinetic theory of gases-introduction, basic  assumption, molecular flux, equation of state for 
an ideal  gas, collisions with a moving wall, principle of equipartition of energy, classical 
theory of specific heat  capacity (8 lectures) 
Transport phenomena-intermolecular forces, The Van der Waals equation of state, collision 
cross section, mean free path (6 lectures) 
 
3. Statistical thermodynamics (fractal 3): [MEL7XX3] [1-0-0] 
Introduction, energy states and energy levels, macro and micro -stares, thermodynamic 
probability (7 lectures) 
Distribution function, partition energy, statistical interpretation of entropy (7 Lectures) 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Van Wylen G. J., Sonntag R. E. and Borgnakke C. (1994), Fundamentals of Classical 
Thermodynamics, Wiley Eastern Limited 
2. Wark, K. Advanced Thermodynamics for Engineers, Mc-Graw Hill 
3. Sears F. W. and Salinger  G. L. (1998), Thermodynamics, Kinetic Theory And Statistical 
Thermodynamics, Narosa Publishing House 
4. Moran M. J., Shapiro H. N., Boettner D. D. and Bailey M. B., Fundamentals of Engineering 
Thermodynamics, John Wiley 
5. Huang, K. Statistical Mechanics, Wiley 
 
 
  
44 
 
Title Applied Heat and Mass Transfer Number MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3-0-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Program Core 
Prerequisite  
 
Objectives 
1. To learn the concepts and design methodologies involved in various types of heat and mass 
transfer applications 
2. To apply the concept of heat and mass transfer to design the system 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Interpret solutions to heat and mass transfer problems. 
2. Ability to analyze and select the heat and mass transfer devices. 
3. Design the system related to heat and mass transfer application. 
 
Contents 
1. Generalities and fundamentals: Heat transfer by conduction, convection and radiation (4 
Lectures)  
2. Heat Conduction: basic law, governing equations in differential form, solution methods, 
steady state, unsteady state problems-fins, moving boundaries. (6 Lectures)   
3. Convective heat transfer - conservation equations, boundary layer approximations, Fo rced 
convective laminar and turbulent flow solutions, Natural convection solutions, correlations. 
(6 Lectures)  
4. Boiling and Condensation: Basic definitions, Inception of Boiling in channel Flow, boiling map, 
Flow models, prediction of friction factor du ring flow boiling, Prediction of Heat transfer, 
Nusselt‟s theory of film condensation, condensation on tubes and tubes banks, In -tube 
condensation, drop wise condensation. (7 Lectures)  
5. Heat Exchanger Design: Design of Tube -in-Tube Parallel and Counter Flow Heat Exchanger, 
Design of Shell and Tube Heat Exchanger, Introduction to Compact Heat Exchanger, 
Analysis of Compact heat exchanger. (5 Lectures)  
6. Heat Transfer Enhancement: Modes of enhancement, Different methods of Enhancement, 
Introduction to different passive methods of heat transfer enhancement, Mechanism of heat 
transfer through surface enhancement, Mechanism of heat transfer through inserts, 
Introduction to different active methods of heat transfer enhancement. (6 Lectures) 
7. Radiation heat transfer: mechanism, properties, exchange between black and nonblack 
surfaces. (4 Lectures)  
8. Mass Transfer- governing laws, Mass transfer coefficients, applications. (4 Lectures)  
 
Reference Books: 
1. Ganapathy V. (1982), Applied heat transfer, PennWell Publishing 
2. Eckerst E.R.G. and Drake R.M. (1972), Analysis of Heat Transfer, McGraw-Hill 
3. Faghri A., Zhang Y. and Howell J. (2010), Advanced Heat and Mass Transfer, Global Digital 
Press 
  
Self-Learning Material 
1. https://nptel.ac.in/downloads/103105052/ 
  
45 
 
Title Experimental Techniques for Thermo-fluids Number MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3-0-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Program Core 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide understanding about measurements in thermal processes related to mass and heat 
transfer in optical/cryogenic/high temperature/plasma/transient environments with acceptable 
precision. 
2. Enable digital and manual experimental data collection in simple as well as extreme thermal 
conditions with efficacy. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Work on measurement of thermal parameters in area of high temperature, low temperature, 
multi-phase fluid and distinct flow regimes. 
2.  Collect data with accuracy and precision, digitize measurements, simulate and analyze all the 
three types of errors in data collection. 
 
Contents 
Sensors and data analysis: Accuracy, Precision, Sensitivity, Calibration (3 lectures), Temporal 
response of probes & transducers (2 lectures), Measurement system model, zeroth, first, and 
second order systems (2 lectures), Probes and transducers (2 lectures), Errors and Error 
Distribution (2 lectures), Regression Analysis (1 lectures); Design of experiments (3 lectures), 
Time series an alysis: time domain and frequency domain (2 lectures), Response to transient 
and periodic signals (1 lectures), Fourier series and Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) (2 lectures), 
Cross-Correlation and Auto Correlation (1 lectures). 
 
Measurement Techniques in Th ermo-Fluids: Thermal Measurement Techniques: Thermocouple 
thermometry, resistance thermometry, thin film sensors, Heat flux measurement (5 lectures); 
Pressure Measurement: U -Tube manometer, pitot probes, piezo electric and piezo resistive 
sensors, pressure sensitive paints, strain gauges (5 lectures); Force and Moment Measurement: 
load cells, accelerometers (2 lectures); Velocity Measurement: Hotwire anemometer, Laser 
Doppler Velocimetry (LDV), Particle image velocimetry (PIV) (3 lectures); Mass and volume flow 
measurement: Venturimeter, Rotameter, Coriolis mass flow meter (3 lectures); Data acquisition 
systems: Analog to digital converter, resolution, noise, signal conditioning (3 lectures).  
 
Reference Books: 
1. Holman, J. P., (2007), Experimental Methods for Engineers, 7th Edition, McGraw Hill. 
2. Eckert, E. R. G., and Goldstein, R. J., (1970), Measurement techniques in heat transfer, 
Technical Press. 
3. Doebelin, E. O., (2004), Measurement Systems: Application and Design, 5th Edition, McGraw 
Hill. 
 
Self Learning Material  
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112106138/12  
2. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112104039/home 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46 
 
 
Title Fluid Engineering Laboratory Number MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical  Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 0–0–2-0 [1] 
Offered for  Type Program Core  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The course will: 
1. Equip students with a variety of experimental skills in fluid mechanics     
2. Provide knowledge to investigate numerically common fluid engineering problems 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Use some experimental methods in Fluid Engineering 
2. Solve problems related to the fluid flow through spreadsheet/MATLAB/Programming  
 
Contents  
Experimental techniques  
1. Pressure drop in fluid flow system (2 Lab Session) 
2. Drag and lift measurement of aerofoil (2 Lab Session) 
3. Velocity and turbulence measurement using Hot wire anemometer (2 Lab Session) 
4. Droplet size measurement using PDPA (2 Lab Session) 
 
Computational Techniques:  
1. Incompressible flow in a nozzle (2 Lab Session) 
2. Fully developed laminar flow between parallel plates (2 Lab Session) 
3. Power law profile for turbulent pipe flow (2 Lab Session) 
4. Aerodynamic drag reduction (2 Lab Session) 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Fox R.W, McDonald A. T., Pritchard P. J., and Mitchell J. W., Introduction to Fluid Mechanics, 
John Wiley 
2. Rathakrishnan E., Instrumentation, Measurements, and Experiments in Fluids 
 
Self Learning Material : NACA videos on youtube 
 
  
47 
 
Title Thermal Engineering Lab Number MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 0-0-2-0 [1] 
Offered for  Type Program Core 
Prerequisite  
 
Objectives 
1. To provide hands on experience of experiments associated with applications of 
Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer 
2. To inculcate understanding of the basic principles and concepts through experiments  
3. To make the students familiar with the sensors, devise, software, and measurement 
techniques associated with Thermal Engineering Applications. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Familiarity with measurement techniques, measurement errors, experimental 
repeatability and reproducibility 
2. Relating theoretical knowledge with experimental measurements 
3. Capability to appreciate empirical relations obtained from combining theoreti cal and 
experimental knowledge 
 
Contents 
1. Measurement of convective heat transfer coefficient  during free convection over vertical 
flat surface and tube banks (2 Lab Session) 
2. Heat exchanger performance characterization (4 lab sessions) 
3. Performance characte rization of Vapor compression refrigeration  system (VCRS) and 
Vapor absorption refrigeration  system (VARS) (4 lab sessions) 
4. Performance Characterization of HVAC system (2 lab session) 
5. CFD simulation of pure diffusion, forced and free convection (4 lab session) 
 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Beckwith T. G., Marangoni R. D., Lienhard J. H. V, Mechanical Measurements, Pearson  
2. Patankar S. V., Numerical Heat Transfer and Fluid Flow 
3. Kuo K.K., Principles of Combustion, Taylor & Francis 
  
48 
 
Program Electives: 
Title Conduction and Radiation Number MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3-1-0-0 [4] 
Offered for  Type Program Elective 
Prerequisite  
 
Objectives: 
1. To provide a deeper and more thorough analytical background for 1 -D, 2-D, 3-D steady and 
transient multi-scale heat conduction problems relevant to multi -disciplinary engineering 
applications. 
2. Exposure to the concepts of solving different classes of partial differential equations (PDE) 
associated with heat conduction problems analytically and numerically. 
3. To provide a deeper and more thorough analytical background for radiation heat transfer 
associated with opaque surfaces and participating media. 
 
 
Learning Outcomes: 
1. Enhanced analytical ability to solve PDEs associated with multidimensional conduction 
problems. 
2. Ability to Identify types of boundary conditions.  
3. Ability to produce codes to solve different classes of conduction problems and familiarity 
with analytical and empirical radiation models used in CFD tools. 
 
 
Contents: 
Conduction:  
1. Recapitulation, 3 -D conduction, isotropic, orthotropic and anisotropic solids, 
Mathematical formulation, analytical solutions, variation of parameters (8 Lectures) 
2. integral method, periodic boundary conditions, Duhamel‟s theorem and Green‟s function, 
Stationary and moving heat sources and sinks, Moving boundary problems (8 Lectures)  
3. Inverse heat conduction problems, Micro -scale heat transfer, Bio -heat transfer, 
Combined mode heat transfer, integro-differential equations, introduction to Monte Carlo 
technique (9 Lectures) 
 
Radiation:  
1. Recapitulation, Radiative properties of opaque surfaces, Configuration factors, (6 
Lectures) 
2. Enclosure analysis for diffuse-gray surfaces and non-diffuse non-gray surfaces, Radiation 
in absorbing, emitting and scattering media (6 Lectures) 
3. Engineering treatment of gas radiation in enclosures, Radiation measurements (5 
Lectures) 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Ã–zisik, Necati M., Necati Özısık M., and NecatiÖzışık, M., Heat conduction, John Wiley & 
Sons. 
2. Howell, J. R., Menguc M. P., and Robert Siegel. Thermal radiation heat transfer. CRC press. 
 
  
49 
 
Title Convective Heat and Mass Transfer Number MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3-1-0-0 [4] 
Offered for  Type Program Elective 
Prerequisite  
 
Objectives 
1. To provide a deeper and more thorough analytical and numerical background for coupled 
heat and fluid flow problems relevant to multi-disciplinary engineering applications. 
2. Exposure to the concept of thermal and hydrodynamic boundary layers and their 
interactions. 
3. Exposure to solution techniques of solving system of coupled non -linier PDEs using 
analytical and numerical methods. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Enhanced analytical and numerical ability to solve system of coupled non -linear PDEs 
associated with multidimensional convection problems. 
2. Ability to Identify types of boundary conditions and coupling constraints.  
3. Ability to produce codes to solve different classes of coupled heat and fluid flow problems.  
 
Contents 
1. Conservation equations for mass, momentum, energy and species . Boundary layer flows, 
similarity parameters, dimensionless numbers. (10 Lectures) 
2. External laminar flow heat transfer. Internal laminar flow heat transfer, entrance region. (10 
Lectures) 
3. Turbulent flow heat transfer, turbulent Prandtl number, external an d internal flows. (6 
Lectures) 
4. Natural convection in external and bounded flows. Rayleigh Benard Convection (6 Lectures)  
5. Mixed convection. Boiling –pool boiling and forced convection boiling in tubes. Condensation 
over a plate, tube and tube banks. Mass tra nsfer. Applications to engineering problems. (10 
Lectures) 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Bejan, A., Convection heat transfer. John Wiley 
2. Kakaç, S., Shah R. K., and Aung, W. Handbook of single-phase convective heat transfer 
3. Kays, W. M., Convective heat and mass transfer, Tata McGraw-Hill 
 
  
50 
 
Title Combustion Technology Number MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3-0-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Program Elective 
Prerequisite  
 
Objectives 
1. To introduce energy and combustion fundamentals for analyzing modern combustion 
systems 
2. To develop understanding of the basic principles and concepts of advanced fuel combustion 
and control process 
3. To be familiar with the fundamental physical and chemical principles regarding formation 
and control of air pollutants in industrial and technological processes. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Understanding of thermodynamics and kinetics of combustion 
2. Apply mathematical equations and solve the problems that are related to combustion 
 
Contents 
Importance of combustion, Combustion phenomena in gas turbines, IC engines and 
power plants; Review of thermodynamics, Chemical kinetics, Mass transfer definitions: 
Fick's law. Equations of conservation of species mass, momentum, and energy; multi -
component diffusion equation, Schv ab-Zel'dovich formulation, Rankine -Hugoniot 
relations (14 lectures) 
 
Laminar premixed flames: Flame speed, adiabatic flame temperature, flammability 
limits, flame stabilization, ignition and quenching; Laminar diffusion flames: Burke -
Schumann problem and droplet burning; Partially premixed flames (14 lectures)  
 
Introduction to turbulent flames: premixed and diffusion flames; Detonations and 
Combustion instabilities (7 lectures) 
 
Combustion of solids: solid propellant, drying, devolatilization and char combustion 
Spray combustion (4 lectures) 
 
Chemical Emission from combustion, Quantification of emission, Emission control 
methods, Introduction to combustion modeling (3 lectures) 
 
Reference Books 
1. Turns, S. R., An Introduction to Combustion: Concepts and Applications, McGraw-Hill 
2. Mishra D. P., Fundamentals of Combustion, Prentice Hall of India, New Delhi 
3. Kuo K.K., Principles of Combustion, John Wiley and Sons 
Self-Learning Material 
1. https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/101106037/ 
  
51 
 
Title Turbulent Flows Number MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3-0-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Program Elective 
Prerequisite  
 
Objectives 
1. Introduce the basic properties of turbulence 
2. Expose the students to theoretical and numerical techniques to describe and quantify 
the effects of turbulence 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Understand the underlying flow physics of turbulent flows and make a trade -off between 
different applicable models 
2. Carry out effectively CFD simulation of an unsteady turbulent flow 
 
Contents 
Introduction to turbulence. Fundamental equations of turbulent flow. Statistical description 
of turbulence. Reynolds equations.  (8 lectures) 
 
Kolmogorov's theory, Scales of turbulence. Homogeneous or isotropic turbulence. Energy 
transfer, Spectral description (12 lectures) 
 
Turbulent free-shear flows. Bounded flows. Boundary layers (6 lectures) 
 
Simulating turbulent flows. Reynolds Averaged Navier -Stokes approach Introduction to 
Large Eddy Simulations and Direct Numerical Simulation. (10 lectures) 
 
Application of AI in Turbulence modeling(4 lectures) 
 
Reference Books 
1. Pope, S. A., Turbulence, Cambridge 
2. Davidson P. A., Turbulent Flows, Oxford 
3. Durbin P. A., Reif B. A., Statistical Theory and Modeling for Turbulent Flows,  John Wiley 
Self-Learning Material 
1. https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/mechanical-engineering/2-27-turbulent-flow-and-
transport-spring-2002/ 
  
52 
 
Title Jet and Rocket Propulsion Number MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3-0-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Program Elective 
Prerequisite  
 
Objectives 
1. Familiarity with common types of aircraft and spacecraft propulsion systems 
2. Preliminary cycle design and performance analysis of propulsion systems for both aircraft 
and spacecraft.  
3. Use of thermodynamic cycle analysis, including the thermodynamic treatment of 
chemically reacting systems.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Calculate energy release, e.g., adiabatic flame temperatures, and equilibrium composition 
of gases at known temperature and pressure 
2. Analyze the thermodynamic performance of jet engine cycles and rocket cycles  along 
with computation of relevant performance parameters 
3. Career in the design, development, operation and maintenance of propulsion systems. 
 
Contents 
Air breathing and non -air breathing engines Thermodynamics Review, Equilibrium Chemical 
Thermodynamics, Thermodynamic Cycle Analysis, One-Dimensional Flow (8 lectures) 
 
Air breathing Propulsion Systems: Engine Performance Parameters, Jet Engine Cycle 
Analysis and Performance; C ycle Design Optimization, Turbojet, Analysis, Design and 
Performance of Turbine Engine Components - intake, nozzle, combustor, turbomachinery (12 
lectures) 
 
Rocket Propulsion Systems: Overview, Performance Parameters, Chemical Rockets cycle 
analysis, Types of propellants and their properties, injectors, thrust chamber, burning rate, 
cryogenic propellant, combustion phenomena, thrust vector control, ignition and inhibitors, 
basics of Electrical and Nuclear propulsion. (10 lectures) 
 
Ram Jet & Scramjet Engine s Operating principle – sub critical, critical and supercritical 
operation. Combustion in ramjet engine, Ramjet performance. Turbo -ramjet engines. 
Introduction to scramjet, preliminary concepts in supersonic combustion, various types of 
supersonic combusto rs, integral ram rocket. Pulse jet engines - Construction details. 
Principles & operation. (12 lectures) 
 
Reference Books 
1. Hill, P. G., and Peterson C. R., Mechanics and Thermodynamics of Propulsion, Addison 
Wesley 
2. Sutton, G. P. and Biblarz O., Rocket Propulsion Elements, John Wiley & Sons 
3. Cumpsty N. A., Jet Propulsion, Cambridge University Press 
Self-Learning Material 
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/101104019/30# 
  
53 
 
Title Computational Fluid Dynamic s and 
Heat Transfer 
Number MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3-1-0-0 [4] 
Offered for    
Prerequisite  
 
Objectives 
1. To provide a deeper and more thorough grounding in principles and basic applications of 
computational fluid mechanics  
2. To provide basic knowledge of CFD to enable function competently in both an industrial 
setting and in further graduate studies involving CFD and its applications. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Describe the major theories, approaches and methodologies used in CFD 
2. Apply CFD methods  in commercial CFD codes and describe the limitations on accuracy  
3. Apply CFD analysis to real engineering designs 
 
Contents 
Introduction to Computational Fluid Dynamics, Review of governing equations for heat 
transfer and fluid flow; Classification of Partial Differential Equations and Physical 
Behaviour (6 lectures) 
 
Finite Difference Method for heat transfer problems, Steady state heat conduction with 
heat source, Convective - diffusive system – Upwind scheme, Transient heat conduction 
– explicit, implicit and Crank – Nicolson methods, Handling variable thermo -physical 
properties, Finite Difference Method for fluid flow problems (10 lectures) 
 
Stream function – vorticity based formulation,Finite Volume Method, Formulation, 
calculation of fluxes at faces of control volume, Source term linearization Discretization 
for convective terms – upwind, power law, QUICK schemes, staggered grid and solution 
of incompressible fluid flow, SIMPLE algorithm and extensions to SIMPLER, SIMPLEC and 
PISO , Introduction to Turbulence Modeling (14 lectures) 
 
Handling various boundary conditions, External and internal flow simulations, Review of 
the solution procedure of system of linear equations (8 lectures) 
 
Numerical methods for radiation–enclosures with gray gas, Hottel zone method.  
Combined convection and radiation. Applications of Monte-Carlo method (4 lectures) 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Patankar, S. Numerical heat transfer and fluid flow. CRC press, 1980. 
2. Versteeg, H. K., and Malalasekera, W. Computational fluid dynamics - The finite volume 
method 
3. Ferziger, J H., and Peric, M., Computational methods for fluid dynamics. Springer 
Self-Learning Material 
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112105045/ 
  
54 
 
Title Two Phase Flow and Heat Transfer  Number MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3-1-0-0 [4] 
Offered for  Type Program Elective 
Prerequisite  
 
Objectives 
1. To learn the concepts and design methodologies involved in various types of thermal energy 
conversion devices.  
2. To gain a deeper understanding of fluid-dynamic mechanisms associated with phase change 
processes. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Learn methods of analysis of two phase flows with and without phase change 
2. Develop analytical tools for design and performance assessment of two-phase devices. 
3. Design codes for solving two-phase heat transfer problems. 
 
Contents 
1. Definitions and basic concept - Review of 1-D conservation equations in single -phase flows, 
Mass flux, heat flux, mass quality, void fraction, liquid holdup, etc. (3 Lectures) 
2. Various two -phase flow models - Governing equations for homogeneous, separated flow 
models and drift-flux models. (5 Lectures) 
3. Flow pattern maps for horizontal and vertical systems - Bubbly, Slug, Annular and Stratified 
Flow, Measurement of Void Fraction, Measurement of Two -phase pressure drop, Lockhart -
Martinelli Correlation, Simplified treatment of stratified, bubbly, slug and annular  flows. (7 
Lectures) 
4. Thermodynamics of boiling, Nucleation at a single site, Hsu‟s model and concept of waiting 
period. (6 Lectures) 
5. Pool boiling - Modes of pool boiling, inception of boiling, correlations for heat transfer 
coefficients, mechanisms of critical heat flux, prediction methods for critical heat flux,effect 
of sub-cooling. (7 Lectures) 
6. Flow boiling - onset of nucleation in c hannel flow, Hysteresis effect, Flow Boiling Map, 
Subcooled flow boiling, Saturated flow boiling, Nucleate boiling, convective boiling, 
correlation for two -phase pressure drop inside tube flow, correlations for heat transfer 
coefficients. (7 Lectures) 
7. Critical heat flux - Introduction, Types of Boiling Crisis and Mechanisms, Prediction of Critical 
Heat Flux, CHF Table, Correlation to predict dryout, Critical heat flux in horizontal and 
vertical systems. (7 Lectures) 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Whalley P.B., Two-Phase flow and Heat Transfer, Oxford University Press 
2. Tong L. S. and Tang Y. S., Boiling Heat Transfer and Two-Phase Flow, Taylor and Francis 
3. Collier J. B. and Thome J. R., Convective Boiling and Condensation, Oxford Science 
Publications 
Self-Learning Material 
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103105058/1 
2. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112107207/ 
  
55 
 
Title Design of Heat Exchange Equipment Number MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3-1-0-0 [4] 
Offered for  Type Program Elective 
Prerequisite  
Objectives 
1. To learn the concepts and design methodologies involved in various types of Heat exchange 
devices.  
2.  To gain a deeper understanding and design process associated with heat exchangers. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Learn methods of heat transfer in heat exchange system 
2. Develop ability to design and performance assessment of heat exchanger devices. 
3. Develop codes for designing heat transfer systems.  
 
Contents 
Construction Details and Heat Transfer Analysis:  
1. Types of Heat exchan ge equipment use in industries, General design consideration of heat 
exchangers, Double pipe heat exchanger, Shell and Tube Heat Exchangers, Regenerators 
and Recuperators, Industrial applications. (7 Lectures) 
2. Temperature distribution and its implications, LMTD, Effectiveness. (4 Lectures) 
3. Flow Distribution and Stress Analysis, Effect of Turbulence, Friction factor, Pressure loss, 
Channel divergence, Thermal Stress in tubes, Types of failures. (7 Lectures) 
 
Design Aspects:  
1. Calculation of Heat Transfer and pressure loss, Flow Configuration, Effect of Baffles, effect of 
Deviations from ideality, Design of Typical liquid, Gas -Gas-Liquid Heat Exchangers, Plate 
Heat Exchangers. (8 Lectures) 
2. Condensers and Evaporators Design: Design of Surface and Evaporative Condensers, Design 
of Shell and Tube, Plate type evaporators. (6 Lectures) 
3. Design aspect of Horizontal and Vertical Heat Exchange systems with phase change. (6 
Lectures) 
4. Cooling Towers Packings, Spray design, Selection of pump s, Fans and Pipes, Testing and 
Maintenance, Experimental Methods (6 Lectures) 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Hewuttm G. F., Shires G. L. and Bott T. R., Process Heat Transfer, CRC Press 
2. Shah R. K., and Sekulic D. P., Fundamentals of Heat Exchanger Design, John Wiley  
3. Smith E. M, Advances in Thermal Design of Heat Exchangers, John Wiley 
Self-Learning Material 
1. https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/103106102/ 
 
  
56 
 
Title Compressible Fluid Flows  Number MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3-0-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Program Elective 
Prerequisite  
 
Objectives 
1. to bring an in -depth understanding on the theory of compressible fluid flows, especially 
supersonic flows. 
2. introduce shock waves in supersonic flows and its reflection, blast waves and various 
experimental techniques for high speed flow visualization.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Predict and solve fluid dynamics of e ngineering applications involving supersonic flows such as, 
flow over supersonic vehicles, nozzle flows, rocket plumes etc. 
2.  Predict flow properties across shock waves and to take up research in high speed flows and 
shock wave dynamics. 
3.  Conduct various high speed flow measurement experiments. 
 
Contents 
Review of thermodynamics; Governing equations for fluid flow (3 lectures); Introduction to 
compressible flows: sonic velocity and Mach number, wave propagation (3 lectures); 
Isentropic flows: stati c and stagnation condition, isentropic flows with area change, nozzle 
operation (4 lectures); Steady adiabatic compressible flows: normal shock, Rankine -
Hugoniot equations, oblique shock; Prandtl -Meyer expansion flows (6 lectures); Adiabatic 
flow with area  change: normal shock in c -d nozzles, oblique shocks in over expanded and 
under expanded nozzle flows, supersonic wind tunnel (6 lectures); Shock reflections: 
reasons for reflection, Regular and Mach reflections (3 lectures); Analytical approach for 
regular and Mach reflection: two shock and three shock theory, shock polar (5 lectures); 
Transition criteria: von -Neumann and detachment criteria (2 lectures); Compressible flow 
with friction: Fanno Flow (3 lectures); Compressible flow with heat transfer: Raylei gh flow 
(2 lectures); Unsteady compressible flows: 1-D wave motion: simple and finite waves, 
Riemann invariants, wave propagation in shock tube, blast waves; Method of characteristics 
(MOC) (3 lectures); Measurements in compressible flows: Schlieren and sh adowgraph. (2 
lectures) 
 
Laboratory Experiments 
1. Mach number prediction in supersonic flow using Pitot tube pressure measurement.  
2. Prediction of choking point and mass flux variation in convergent nozzle with change in back 
pressure.  
3. Evaluating convergent-divergent (c -d) nozzle flow pressure curve and finding critical 
pressure ratios. 
4. Prediction of normal shock location in c-d nozzle for various pressure ratios. 
5. Schlieren and Shadowgraph optical flow visualization techniques for shock wave 
visualization. 
6. Shock diamonds in over and underexpanded nozzle jets and flow property evaluation across 
the first shock diamond.  
7. Transition criteria for regular reflection to Mach reflection in wedge induced shock 
reflections. 
8. Mach number prediction of moving shock in shock tubes using pressure measurements. 
Reference Books: 
1. Zucker R. D. and Biblarz O., Fundamentals of Gas Dynamics, Wiley 
2. John J. E. A. and Keith T., Gas Dynamics, Prentice Hall 
3. Anderson J. D., Modern Compressible Flow: With Historical Perspective, McGraw-Hill 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
57 
 
Title Optical & Laser based Measurements in 
Thermo-Fluids 
Number MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3-0-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Program Elective 
Prerequisite  
 
Objectives 
1. To introduce students with various non-intrusive measurement tools using laser and optical 
methods. 
2. To introduce students with various image processing techniques for thermo -fluidic 
measurements. 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Theoretical knowledge on conducting various laser and optical based experimental 
measurements. 
2. Knowledge to use advanced measurement tools for combustion, spray and supersonic flow 
research.  
 
Contents 
Introduction to optics and high speed imaging; Flow visualization using light scattering and 
refraction: Mie scattering, Rayleigh scattering, Shadowgraph and Schlieren; Thermal imaging: 
I-R cameras; Image processing for thermo -fluids measurements: Background subtraction, 
Filtering, Flat Field Correction, Edge detection, Modal decomposition using Proper Orthogonal  
Decomposition (POD) and Dynamic Mode Decomposition (DMD). (14 Lectures) 
 
Introduction to Lasers, Nonintrusive diagnostic techniques, Application areas and relevance; 
Measurement of concentration and gaseous flow mixing: Acetone Laser Induced Fluorescence 
(LIF); Measurement of Combustion species: LIF ( OH, CH PLIF); Measurement of planar 
temperature: 2 Line Planar Laser Induced Fluorescence (PLIF), Coherent anti -Stokes Raman 
Spectroscopy (CARS) ; (14 Lectures) 
 
Soot measurement: LII (laser induced incandesc ence); Spray measurements: direct laser 
sheet imaging, Phase Doppler Particle Analyzer (PDPA); Liquid LIF: spray characteristics, 
quantification of liquid film thickness impingement, jet break up characteristics; Flow Velocity 
and Turbulence:  Laser Dopple r Velocimetry (LDV), Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV). (14 
Lectures) 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Schulz, C., Dreizler, A., Wolfrum J., Combustion Diagnostics, Springer Handbook of 
Experimental Fluid Mechanics 
2. Leipertz A., Pfadler S., and Schiebl R., An Overview of Combustion Diagnostics, Handbook of 
Combustion Vol.2: Combustion Diagnostics and Pollutants. 
Self-Learning Material: 
1. M. Alde´n, J. Bood, Z. Li, M. Richter, Visualization and understanding of combustion 
processes using spatially and temporally resolved laser  diagnostic techniques, Proceedings 
of the Combustion Institute 33 (2011) 69–97 
2. R. K. Hanson, Combustion Diagnostics: Planar Imaging Techniques, Twenty-first Symposium 
(International) on Combustion/The Combustion Institute, 1986/pp. 1677-1691. 
3. Dantec Dynamics, https://www.dantecdynamics.com/all-measurement-principles. 
   
58 
 
Title Fluid dynamics and Acoustics of Turbulent 
Jets 
Number MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3-0-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Program 
Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
1. to bring an in-depth understanding on the theory of turbulent jets and its acoustics. 
2. introduces students with various measurement techniques for noise prediction in turbulent 
jets.  
 
Learning Outcomes:  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Sound and noise prediction of wide variety of engineering applications involving jet flo ws. 
2. Data analysis from time series measurements. 
3. Conduct various acoustic measurement experiments. 
 
Contents: 
Introduction to turbulent free jets: Structure of subsonic and supersonic jets, plane and 
circular jets, jet spreading (3 lectures);  
Governing equations for plane turbulent free jet: Integral equations for momentum, 
moment of momentum and energy, similarity analysis, entrainment principle, Tollmien 
solution, experimental measurements in plane jets (6 lectures);  
Governing equations for circular turbulent free jet: Integral equations for momentum, 
moment of momentum and energy, similarity analysis, entrainment principle, Tollmien 
solution (6 lectures);  
Plane turbulent shear layers: Similarity analysis, shear layer growth, mixing layers, stream 
wise and span wise vortices, jet axis switching, introduction to shear layer instabilities (5 
lectures);  
Introduction to acoustics: unsteady wave equation, acoustic speed (4 lectures);  
Jet acoustics: Sound Pressure Level (SPL), Overall Sound Pressure Level (OSPL), near field 
and far/free filed, sound intensity and power, sound intensity level (SIL), scaling laws in 
free field (6 lectures);  
Sources of sound: monopole, dipole, quadrupole (2 lectures);   
Jet Noise: broad band noise and tonal noise, feedback loop and screech tone (3 lectures);  
Acoustic measurements: Anechoic chamber, microphones, SPL measurements (3 lectures);  
Time series analysis: Time and frequenc y domain, Fast Fourier Transform (FFT), auto 
correlation and cross correlation functions, power spectrum, Linear spectral analysis (4 
lectures). 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Rajaratnan N., Turbulent Jets, Elsevier 
2. Mueller T. J., Allen C. S., Blake W. K., Dougherty R.  P., Lynch D., Soderman P. T., and 
Underbrink J. R., Aeroacoustic Measurements, Springer 
3. Raman G., Jet Aero Acoustics, Multi-science Publishing 
  
59 
 
Title Heating, Ventilation and Air-
Conditioning 
Number MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical  Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3-0-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Program Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Teach applications of Psychrometrics in industry, residential, automotive and building design.    
2. Inculcate design of air conditioning systems keeping in building design codes in mind.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Design spaces with appropriate thermal comfort specific to the requirements of the utility of 
the space. 
2. To incorporate processes and refrigerants such that it adheres to national standards for 
energy conservation and building code. 
 
Contents  
Standards and Design Process (Lecture 1-10) 
Introduction, Historical development of heating, ventilation, and air -conditioning engineering 
(HVAC).  The design process. Standards and norms psychrometry of air -conditioning processes. 
HVAC technologies. Thermal comfort - factors influencing thermal com fort. Simulations can be 
performed for Cooling and Heating load calculations. Software  such EQuest, Design Builder, HAP, 
Trace and Smart Energy.  
 
Ventilation Aspects (Lecture 10-26) 
Room air distribution principles. Design of air duct systems. System solutions for renewable energy 
production and heat storage; for ventilation and tempering of rooms; for domestic water supply, 
sewerage and preparation of domestic hot water. Selection of  Refrigerants according to 
requirements and latest climate protocol standards; Sizing of systems for renewable energy 
production and heat storage; space heating and cooling. Natural ventilation, principles of air supply 
and tempering of rooms. Methods for selecting and sizing the supply air terminals. Sizing of 
hydronic heating systems.  
 
Selection of components for air conditioning (Lecture 26-34)  
Study on filters, dampers, fans, ducts, pumps, valves, piping, heat exchangers, sensors and control 
components Indoor air quality, Ventilation - need, principles. Various types of air conditioning 
systems. Cooling, dehumidification and humidification equipment. Temperature, pressure and 
humidity controllers. Various types of controls and control strategies for fo od preservation, storage 
and other industrial aspects. 
 
Environment Design and Green Building Norms (Lecture 35-42) 
Climatic factors, classification of tropical climates, site climate, microclimate of human settlements, 
ventilation requirements for health,  solar tracking and building design, mechanisms and estimation 
of natural ventilation, airflow patterns in building. Thermal comfort factors, comfort indices, 
thermal quantities, heat exchange in buildings, periodic heat flow.  
Mechanical and structural me ans of thermal control. Moisture control in buildings, Monitoring and 
control of air conditioning plants, building automation. Use of dynamic simulation program for the 
design and evaluation.  Measures to meet LEED, BEE and GRIHA standards.  
 
Reference Books: 
1. Ameen A., Refrigeration and Air Conditioning, PHI, Learning 
2. Stocker W. F. and Jones J. W., Refrigeration & Air conditioning, TMH 
3. Ananthanarayanan P. N., Basic Refrigeration and Air Conditioning, Tata McGraw-Hill 
 
 
 
 
60 
 
Self Learning Material :  
1. https://www.asme.org/learning-development/find-course/heating-ventilation-air- 
conditioning 
2. https://www.eit.edu.au/cms/courses/mechanical-engineering/professional-certificate/in-
heating-ventilation-and-air-conditioning-hvac 
 
  
61 
 
Open Electives: 
Title Fluid Flow in Biological Processes Number MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical  Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3-0-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Open Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Teach topics on the fundamentals of biological flows    
2.  Provide knowledge required to analyse and model biological flows 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Explain the fundamentals of flows in biological processes. 
2. Demonstrate knowledge of solving problems related to the  fluid transport phenomena  in 
the biological processes 
 
Contents  
Basics of biological flows (12 lectures) 
Introduction to the course, Complexity of fluid properties,Fluid drag, Coefficient of viscosity 
Newton's law of viscosity, Molecular basis for viscosity,Fluid rheology, Navier-Stokes equation, 
Viscous-dominated flows, internal flows, Porous media, poroelasticity, Cellular fluid mechanics, 
Blood flow 
Biological transport:  (14 lectures) 
Diffusional flux, Fourier, Fick and Newton,Steady-state diffusion,Concentration 
gradients,Unsteady diffusion equation, Convection-diffusion equation,Convection-diffusion 
equation, Relative importance of convection and diffusion,The Peclet number, Solute/solvent 
transport, Solving the convection-diffusion equation in flow channels 
Fluid flow in Biological Processes and their modeling: (16 lectures) 
Flow Through a Permeable Tube, Respiratory Airflow,, Hemodynamics in the Developing 
Cardiovascular System, Blood Flow in Stented Coronary Arteries, Fluid structure interaction in 
arteries, flow in renal arteries 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Truskey, G. A., Yuan F., and Katz D. F., Transport Phenomena in Biological Systems, 
Prentice Hall 
2. Bird, R. B., Lightfoot E. N., and Stewart W. E., Transport Phenomena, Wiley 
 
 
Self-Learning Material 
1. https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/biological-engineering/20-330j-fields-forces-and-flows-in-
biological-systems-spring-2007/index.htm 
 
  
62 
 
Title Nanosensors Number MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3-0-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech, M. Tech and PhD  Type Open Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide understanding about importance of nanoscale materials for sensing applications.  
2.  Teach approaches for fabrication and characterizing of sensors based on nanomaterials.  
3. Enhance critical, creative and innovative thinking to tailor nanomaterials for specific application. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Design and fabricate nanomaterial based sensors. 
2.  Undertake interdisciplinary research and exploit nanomaterials for new sensing applications.  
 
Contents  
Sensor types: Displacement, position and proximity sensors (3 lectures); velocity, motion, force 
and pressure sensors (4 lectures); components and classification of sensors (1 lecture); 
parameters for sensor characterization (1 lecture); sensor arrays (1 lecture). 
Nanostructures and Nanoparticles:  Nanostructures (1 lectures); nanostructure fabrication (top 
down and bottom up approach) (3 lectures); characterization of nanostructures using different 
techniques (Atomic Force Microscopy, Scanning Electron Microscopy,  Tunneling Electron 
Microscopy) (3 lectures); nanoparticles (types and shapes) (1 lecture); nanoparticle production, 
shape control, functionalization and application (2 lectures); nanowires (properties, sensing 
mechanism, fabrication, and devices) (4 lectures); quantum dots (1 lecture). 
Carbon nanotubes/nanofibres (CNT/CNF) and other Nanosensors: CNT structure, properties, 
synthesis, functionalization (3 lectures); CNT/CNF based sensors (single layer/multi -layer) (2 
lectures); nanostructure, nanoparticles, nanowire and nanofibre based metal oxide sensors (3 
lectures); flexible sensors and electronic skin (2 lectures); Nanosensors in engineering 
applications: optical, chemical, mechanical, electrochemical, mass sensitive, biosensors, 
mechanical sensors in liquid solution, thin film sensors (7 lectures). 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Khanna, V. K., (2011), Nanosensors: Physical, Chemical, and Biological, CRC Press. 
2. Atta, N. F., (2014), Nanosensors: Materials and Technologies. IFSA Publishing. 
3. Meyyappan, M., (2004), Carbon Nanotubes: Science and Applications, 1st Edition, CRC Press. 
 
Self Learning Material  
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112108092  
2.  https://www.coursera.org/learn/nanotechnology/home 
  
63 
 
Title Water Energy Nexus Number MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3-0-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Open Elective 
Prerequisite  
 
Objectives 
1. to understand relation of energy of water use in our daily lives as well as water use for 
energy and food production  
2. to enable plan pathways of water life cycle according the end-use requirements in 
municipal/ agriculture/ industrial environments 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Ability to design energy/cost optimized systems according to location specific end -use 
requirements and water availability 
2. To have capability to locate correct locations where energy intensity as well as water 
efficiency measurements of the water transport within systems can be performed  
 
Contents 
1. Introduction to energy -water nexus: Hydro -electric power production, Water Life Cycle in 
the different economic sectors (4 Lectures) 
2. Energy intensity (Joule/Litre etc.) definition, Equivalent el ectrical energy intensity 
[kWh/m3], Basic unit conversion, factors of energy conversion from thermal to electrical 
and vice versa (6 Lectures) 
3. Water extraction from ground as well as surface. Pumping efficiency, effect of lift and other 
influencing parameters, Different modes of surface water transfer. (5 Lectures) 
4. General overview of conventional water treatment energy use, Intro to thermal desalination, 
Membrane desalination systems, hybrid desalination systems .Renewable and non -
renewable sources of energy and its influence of energy intensity (6 Lectures) 
5. Discussion on water end -use based electrical and thermal energy consumption. Electricity 
consumption in Residential water use: Clothes Washing, doing dishes, heating water, 
cooking water based foods. Co mmercial buildings and Energy use; Do buildings consume 
energy or the people within, Human behavior and variation in energy consumption. (8 
Lectures) 
6. Waste water recycling: review, of equivalent electrical energy intensity and operation of 
waste water treatment plant equipment and technologies. (4 Lectures) 
7. Agricultural water use and their energy intensity: Energy intensity of irrigation water use 
with change in crops; change in irrigation technology, subsidy in electricity, human 
behavior; with variation in geographic land scape. (5 Lectures) 
8. Case study of water life cycle in various locations: USA, Ontario, Canada, China, Australia, 
India (4 Lectures) 
Reference Books: 
1. Sommariva C., Desalination Desalination and Advanced Water Treatment: Economics and 
Financing, Balaban Desalination Publications 
2. Plappally A. K. and Lienhard J. H., Energy Requirements for Water Production, Treatment, 
End Use, Reclamation and Discharge, Renewable and sustainable energy reviews 
3. WEF, Energy Conservation in Water and Waste Water Facilities, WEF Press, McGraw Hill 
Self-Learning Material: 
1. https://www.edx.org/course/sustainable-development-the-water-energy-food-nexus 
2. https://www.water-energy-food.org/resources/resources-detail/university-of-california-
water-energy-nexus-course-of-studies-at-irvine/ 
3. https://ce.uci.edu/areas/facilities/waternexus 
 
  
64 
 
 
Title Soil and water conservation 
Engineering  
Number MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3-0-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Open Elective 
Prerequisite  
 
Objectives: 
1. to enable students to design irrigation systems, ponds, water ways and treatment wetlands  
2. to enable to understand flow physics of water through soils, piping systems and lake 
systems in order to conserve water and treat soils. 
 
Learning Outcomes: 
1. Ability to design crop specific irrigation practices 
2. To have capability to help treat soil contamination, enhance soil productivity and water use 
optimization.   
 
Contents: 
1. Precipitation, Infiltration, Evaporation and Transpiration (5 Lectures) 
2. Run-off, water erosion and control practices, Wind erosion and Control practices (6 
Lectures) 
3. Vegetated waterways, Constructed Wetlands and Hydrodynamics (6 Lectures) 
4. Open Channels flows and Subsurface Drainage Design (6 Lectures) 
5. Pumps, Pumping, Water Supply and Quality (5 Lectures) 
6. Balancing soil nutrients and Basics in Agronomy (4 Lectures) 
7. Irrigation Principles (3 Lectures) 
8. Soil Less Farming (3 Lectures) 
9. Micro-irrigation and Sprinkler Irrigation Design (4 Lectures) 
 
Reference Books 
1. Schwab G. O., Fangmeier D. D., Elliot W. J. and Frevert R. K., Soil and Water Conservation 
Engineering, John Wiley & Sons 
2. Micheal A. M, Irrigation theory and Practice, Vikas Publication House 
3. Subramanya K., Environmental Hydrology, McGraw Hill Education 
Self-Learning Material: 
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/126105012/ 
2. https://icar.org.in/content/soil-and-water-conservation-engineering 
 
  
65 
 
Title Probabilistic Methods in Engineering 
Design 
Number MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3-0-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Open Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
1. To provide a unified probabilistic approach to design aspects in transport phenomena, 
hydrology, climatic events, properties of materials and dealing with environmental and 
ecological variables. 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Ability to model and predict phenomena such as development of strength in composite 
materials,  size effect in failure theories,  precipitation events,  earth quake occurrences,  
and system behaviors etc. 
2. To assess the reliability of engineering structures, to assess hazard rates of extreme climatic 
events, to assess the multi-parameter influences on flow, electro-kinetic parameters. 
Contents 
Data:  Hydrologic Data,  Big data,  Overview of how data can be helpful in designing and 
planning urban spaces,  social data,  experimental data and specific nature of the data related 
to heat measurement,  electricity,  dielectric strength,  porosity,  particle  size distribution,   and 
other materials properties,  stochastic data and its behavior,  line diagram representation of 
linear and nonlinear data (8 lectures) 
Prior and Post event categorization:  Collective and exhaustive events,  Total probability 
theorem,  Bayes Theorem,  Calculations of Probability Density Function,  Cumulative Density 
Function when experimental data is provided (6 lectures) 
Data Reduction:  Descriptive statistics, Skewness, Moments, Kurtosis, Parameter Estimation,  
Chebyshev Inequality,  Law of Large Numbers,  Descriptive statistics introduction and training 
exercises in design of experiments and data compilation (6 lectures) 
Presentation:  Hydrographs,  Distribution graph,  flood frequency studies,  normal annual 
precipitation events,  lognormal models in fracture of materials and strength characterization,  
Gumbel Distribution,  Log Pearson Type III Distribution,  Extreme events type 1 distrbution,  
Raleigh Distribution (assessing errors in projectile motion),  exponential distributio n,  Erlangs 
distribution and its variation the gamma distribution,  Markov Processes.  MINITAB 15/16 
introduction and training exercises on transforming data as required by the software (8 
lectures) 
Analysis:  Auto-correlation,  hydrologic time series,  sp ectral density functions,  Regression,  
removing correlations between predictor variables,  linear multi -parameter regression,  
Principal components,  factor analysis,  multi -variate regression analysis,  Boot strapping and 
Jack Knife Procedures. Exercises  to find correlation matrices from available experimental data, 
finding principal components using multi -variate analysis etc. Introduction to GEPHI and social 
network data analysis with intra-levels (10 lectures) 
Testing:  Sensitivity Analysis, Kolmogorov  Smirnov Tests, Chi square Tests, Analysis of 
variance.  Exercises to perform normality tests and variance analysis. (4 lectures) 
Laboratory Experiments 
 MINITAB 15/16 introduction and MATLAB training exercises on transforming data as required 
by the software. 
Reference Books 
1. Benjamin J. R. and Cornell A. C., Probability, Statistics and Decision for Civil Engineers, 
McGraw Hill 
2. Ang A. H. S. and Tang W. H., Probability Concepts in Engineering, Planning and Design Vol -
1- Engineering and Design, John Wiley 
3. Ang A. H. S. and Tang W. H., Probability Concepts in Engineering, Planning and Design Vol -
2- Decision, Risk and Reliability, John Wiley 
Online Course Material 
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105105045/ 
 
 
66 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
M.Tech.  
In 
Metallurgical and Materials Engineering 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
67 
 
Introduction 
Metallurgical and Materials Engineering is an interdisciplinary branch that deals with converting ore 
into a product by focusing on design, extraction, processing, and characterization of  materials for 
aerospace, automotive, energy, electronics, and healthcare applications. The following are the 
focus areas of the Department: (a) Process Metallurgy, (b) Structural Materials, (c) Functional 
Materials, and (d) Computational Materials Engineering. While the Process Me tallurgy deals with 
mineral beneficiation and metal extraction, the Structural Materials deals with understanding the 
process-microstructure-property correlation to expand the application of a given material. In the 
Functional Materials research, materials  for specific functions such as energy harvesting, 
healthcare, and information processing are studied. The Computational Materials Engineering 
provides understanding of materials from atomistic to macro length scales, and help in materials 
selection, alloy design, and improvement of metallurgical processes. 
Objective 
 To produce professionals with deep understanding of experimental and computational 
materials engineering, capable of providing innovative solutions for materials challenges in 
energy, electronics, aerospace, automotive, and healthcare industries. 
 To train the students for the roles of future academicians, scientists, innovators, and 
entrepreneurs. 
 
Graduate attributes 
 Ability to correlate electronic structure with transport properties of materials 
 Skill set to optimize microstructure and determine structure-property correlation 
 Ability to design and execute experiments for studying mechanical behavior of materials, 
and develop mechanistic models for failure prediction 
 Ability to determine metallurgical processing parameters for extraction of ferrous and non-
ferrous metals, and design process cycle to convert ore to final product 
 Ability to fabricate components following traditional and non-traditional manufacturing 
processes 
 Ability to characterize features at atomic, nano-, meso-, micro- and macro- length scales 
 Ability to innovate materials for next generation energy, electronic and healthcare devices  
 Skills to communicate the scientific findings to peers and general public  
 Appreciation and adherence to professional ethics 
  Ability to design and execute technical projects 
 
Learning Outcome 
Ability to  
 Design the materials by microstructure control to meet the required properties 
 Use various modeling techniques for studying physical, mechanical, functional and transport 
properties of materials 
68 
 
 Apply thermodynamics and kinetics principles to understand and control materials processes  
 Fabricate structural and functional materials through traditional and non-traditional 
manufacturing processes 
 Use various material characterization tools 
 Apply principles of material deformation to predict failure of materials for reliable design of 
structures 
 Understand the process metallurgy involved in ferrous and non-ferrous metal extraction 
 Define a scientific problem and devise  an appropriate methodology for addressing the 
problem 
 Identify normative commitments of technological knowledge, artifacts and familiarity with 
the manifold responsibilities linked to their profession. 
 Critically develop linguistic competence and subject competence in the genres of technical 
communication. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
69 
 
Program structure with courses 
Cat. Course Number, Course Title L-T-P-D Credits  Cat. Course Number, Course Title L-T-P-D Credits 
I Semester  II Semester 
MC MT7LXX0 Metallurgical 
Thermodynamics and 
Kinetics 
3-1-0-0 4  MC MT7LXX0 Computational 
Materials Engineering 
3-0-2-0 4 
MC MT7LXX0 Characterization of 
Minerals, Metals and 
Materials 
3-0-2-0 4  MC MT7LXX0 Phase 
Transformations in 
Solids  
3-0-2-0 4 
ME MT7LXX0 Program Elective -1  3-0-0-0 3  ME MT7LXX0 Program Elective-3 3-0-0-0 3 
ME MT7LXX0 Program Elective -2  3-0-0-0 3  ME MT7LXX0 Program Elective-4  3-0-0-0 3 
NH HSN7XX0 Technical 
Communication 
1-0-0-0 1  NH OAL7XX0 
 
Innovation and IP 
Management  
1-0-0-0 1 
Total 15  Total 15 
III Semester  IV Semester 
ME MT7LXX0 Program Elective-5  3-0-0-0 3  MO  Open Elective-2 3-0-0-0 3 
ME MT7LXX0 Program Elective-6  3-0-0-0 3  MP MT7DXX0 Project (Stage-II) 0-0-0-11 11 
MO  Open Elective-1 3-0-0-0 3  NH HSN7XX0 Professional Ethics 1-0-0-0 1 
MP MT7DXX0 Project (Stage-I) 0-0-0-5 5       
NH OAN7XX0 Systems Engineering 
and Project 
Management 
1-0-0-0 1       
Total 15  Total  15 
 
Distribution of Credits (M.Tech.) 
S.No. Category Category Title Total 
Courses 
Total Credits 
1 C Compulsory 4 16 
2 E  Program Electives 6 18 
2 O  Open Electives 2 6 
4 P Project 16 16 
Total     56 
 
Program electives can be taken from any of the following courses offered by the department. Open 
electives may be taken from other departments.  
70 
 
Topic Clouds 
1. Metallurgical Thermodynamics and Kinetics 
 Laws of thermodynamics  
 Thermodynamics of solutions  
 Application of Thermodynamics to Chemical reactions 
 Phase diagrams 
 Thermodynamics of interfaces 
 Diffusion in solids 
2. Characterization of Minerals Metals and Materials 
 Optical Microscopy 
 Scanning Electron Microscopy 
 Transmission Electron Microscopy 
 Scanning Probe Microscopy 
 Spectroscopic characterization 
 X-Ray Diffraction 
 Electron Diffraction. 
 Thermal Analysis 
 Non-destructive testing of materials 
3. Computational Materials Engineering 
 First principles calculations 
 Molecular dynamics simulations 
 Alloy Design 
4. Phase Transformations and Solidification 
 Thermodynamics of phase transformations 
  Solid state phase transformations 
 Solidification process 
 Gating and riser design for casting 
 Nucleation and growth 
5. Material Processing 
 Light Metal and Alloys 
71 
 
o Processing of light metals and alloys 
 Additive manufacturing 
o Materials for additive manufacturing 
o Additive manufacturing methods  
o Structure-property control in additive manufacturing 
 Thermo Mechanical Processing 
o Principles and applications of thermo- mechanical processing 
6. Microstructure Design and Mechanical Properties 
 Effect of microstructure on mechanical properties 
 Strengthening mechanisms 
 High Temperature deformation 
 Deformation behavior of ceramics and polymeric materials 
 Theory of fracture mechanics 
 Cyclic deformation of materials 
 Creep-Fatigue interaction 
7. Electrochemistry and Corrosion 
 Fundamentals of electrochemistry 
 Forms of corrosion 
 Corrosion Prevention methods 
 High temperature oxidation 
 Corrosion monitoring 
8. Ceramics and Composites 
 Structural Ceramics 
 Processing of ceramics  
 Functional ceramics 
 Metal Matrix Composites 
 Polymer Matrix Composites 
 Ceramic matrix composites 
 
 
72 
 
List of Electives  
Following is the list of courses that can be offered to M.Tech. Students   
(A) ELECTIVE I: Materials Modeling and Simulation  
Course 
Number 
Course Title L-T-P-D  Credits 
MT7LXX0 Alloy Design : Computational Thermodynamic 
approach 
3-0-2-0 4 
(B) ELECTIVE II: Extractive and Process Metallurgy 
Course 
Number 
Course Title L-T-P-D Credits 
MT7LXX0 Mineral Engineering 3-0-0-0 3 
MT7LXX0 Iron and Steel Making 3-0-0-0 3 
MT7LXX0 Solidification Processing 3-0-0-0 3 
MT7LXX0 Industrial Waste: Control and Utilization 3-0-0-0 3 
(C) ELECTIVE III: Metallurgical Manufacturing  
Course 
Number 
Course Title L-T-P-D Credits 
MT7LXX0 Light Metals and Alloys 3-0-0-0 3 
MT7LXX0 Near Net Forming  3-0-0-0 3 
MT7LXX0 Powder Metallurgy 3-0-0-0 3 
MT7LXX0 Thermo Mechanical Processing 3-0-0-0 3 
MT7LXX0 Material Aspects in Additive Manufacturing 3-0-0-0 3 
(D) ELECTIVE IV: Physical Metallurgy 
Course 
Number 
Course Title L-T-P-D Credits 
MT7LXX0 Plastic Deformation and Microstructure Evolution 3-0-0-0 3 
MT7LXX0 Corrosion Engineering 3-0-0-0 3 
MT7LXX0 Introduction to Dislocations  3-0-0-0 3 
MT7LXX0 Structure-Property-Correlation 3-0-0-0 3 
MT7LXX0 Mechanical Behavior of Materials 3-0-2-0 4 
MT7LXX1 Electron and Scanning Probe Microscopy 1-0-0-0 1 
MT7LXX2 Light Microscopy and Spectroscopic Techniques 1-0-0-0 1 
MT7LXX3 Diffraction and Thermal Analysis Techniques 1-0-0-0 1 
MT7PXX4 Materials Characterization Laboratory 0-0-2-0 1 
 (E) ELECTIVE V: Functional Materials and Devices  
Course 
Number 
Course Title L-T-P-D Credits 
MT7LXX0 Ceramics  3-0-0-0 3 
MT7LXX0 Composites  3-0-0-0 3 
MT7LXX0 Polymers and their composites 3-0-0-0 3 
MT7LXX0 Principles of Engineering Material Selection 3-0-0-0 3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
73 
 
DETAILED SYLLABUS FOR THE COMPULSORY COURSES 
 
Title Metallurgical Thermodynamics and 
Kinetics 
Number MT7LXX0 
Department  Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–1–0 [4] 
Offered for M.Tech. and Ph.D. Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite  
 
Objectives 
1. Provide a basis for describing and understanding the stability of various forms of 
matter. 
2. Provide a basis for predicting the properties of an equilibrated system as a function of 
its content and characteristics. 
  
Learning Outcomes 
1. Establish the conditions for stability of a material and derive its properties.  
2. Control the evolution of microstructures with respect to different parameters. 
  
Course Content 
 
Laws of thermodynamics and Chemical reactions (14 lectures) 
 
First, second and third laws (3 lectures) 
statistical interpretation of entropy (3 lectures)  
Free energy functions and criteria for equilibrium (3 lectures) 
reaction equilibrium, equilibrium constant; applications to materials and metallurgical 
systems (5 lectures). 
 
Thermodynamics of solutions and phase diagrams (14 lectures) 
 
Ideal and non -ideal solutions, partial and molar quantities, quasi -chemical model and 
regular solutions (3 lectures). 
Phase rule and binary phase diagrams (2 lectures),  
free energy composition diagrams (5 lectures) 
phase equilibrium calculations. (4 lectures) 
 
Thermodynamics of interfaces and kinetics (14 lectures) 
 
Interfaces, surface tension and surface energy (3 lectures) 
equilibrium at interfaces, nucleation (3 lectures),  
coherency (1 lecture), 
thermal activation, diffusion, concentration gradients, thermal gradients (3 lectures) 
Fick‟s laws, mechanisms of interface migration (3 lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. Gaskell, D.R., Introduction to Metallurgical Thermodynamics, McGraw-Hill 1995. 
2. Swalin, R. A.,  Thermodynamics of Solids, reprint Edition, Wiley, 1962. 
3. Balluffi, R. W., Samuel, M. A., Carter, W. C., Kinetics of Materials, Wiley, 2005. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
1. Bird, R.B., Stewart, W.E. and Lightfoot, E.N., Transport Phenomena, Wiley, 1960. 
2. Hillert, M., Phase Equilibria, Phase Diagrams and Phase Transformations Their 
Thermodynamic Basis, Second edition, Cambridge University Press 2008. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
74 
 
 
Title Characterization of Minerals Metals 
and Materials 
Number MT7LXX0 
Department  Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–2 [4] 
Offered for M.Tech. 1st Year Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite  
 
Objective 
1. Understanding the instruments and methods for characterising different materials and 
their properties.   
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. Basic working principles for various instruments. 
2. Choice of characterization methods based on their analysis and performance. 
 
Course Content 
 
MTL7XX1: Electron and Scanning Probe Microscopy [1-0-0] 
Introduction: Importance of Characterization of Materials, Structural and Functional 
Characterizations, Review of Crystallography. (4 Lectures) 
Electron Microscopies : Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) & Transmission Electron 
Microscopy (TEM). (7 Lectures) 
Scanning Probe Microscopy : Scanning Tunnelling Microscopy (SEM) & Atomic Force 
Microscopy (AFM). (3 Lectures) 
MTL7XX2: Light Microscopy and Spectroscopic Techniques [1-0-0] 
Light Optical Microscopy : Polarization microscopy for minerals, Phase contrast 
microscopy for metals, DIC Microscopy and Confocal and other special techniques for 
polymers and biomaterials. (7 Lectures) 
Spectroscopic characterization : UV-VIS-NIR, FTIR, Photoluminescence and Raman 
Spectroscopy. (7 Lectures) 
MTL7XX3: Diffraction and Thermal Analysis Techniques [1-0-0] 
Diffraction Techniques: X-Ray Diffraction, Electron Diffraction. (10 Lectures) 
Thermal Analysis : Thermal Mechanical Analysis (TMA), Differential Scanning 
Calorimetric (DSC), Thermal Gravimetric Analysis (TGA), Differential Thermal Analysis 
(DTA). (4 Lectures) 
MTP7XX4: Materials Characterization Laboratory [0-0-2] 
             Calculation of thermodynamic parameters using DSC analysis; Functional group analysis    
            using FTIR; XRD Pattern Indexing; Lattice parameter and crystallite size              
            calculation; Electron Diffraction Pattern Indexing; Image Analysis. 
 
Text Books 
1. Zhang, S., Li, L. and Kumar, A., Materials Characterization Techniques, CRC Press, 2008. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
1.    Evans, C., Brundle. R. and Wilson, Encyclopaedia of Materials Characterization: Surfaces, 
Interfaces, Thin Films (Materials Characterization Series), Butterworth-Heinemann, 1992. 
2.    Kaufmann, E.N., Characterization of Materials, 3 Volume Set, 2nd Edition, Wiley, 2012. 
 
Online Course Material  
1. Shankaran, S., Materials Characterization, Department of Metallurgical & Materials 
Engineering,  Indian Institute of Technology, Madras, NPTEL 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113106034/ 
2. Biswas, K. and Gurao, N.P., Advanced Characterization Techniques, Department of 
Materials Science and Engineering,  Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, NPTEL 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113104004 
 
 
 
Title Computational Materials 
Engineering 
Number MT7LXX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials L-T-P [C] 3–0–2 [4] 
75 
 
Engineering 
Offered for M.Tech. and Ph.D. Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite  
 
Objective 
1. To understand different modeling and simulations techniques for studying various 
materials. 
  
Learning Outcomes 
 
1. Student will be able to understand and use the first-principles calculations 
2. Student will be able to understand and run the Molecular dynamics simulations 
 
Course Content 
 
First-principles calculations (28 lectures)  
 
        Introduction, Density functional theory (5 lectures), Kohn-Sham method (4 lectures), 
Exchange-correlation energy (2 lectures), Crystal structure (1 lecture), Pseudopotential approach 
(2 lectures), Bloch‟s theorem (2 lectures), Structure relaxation (1 lecture), Electronic band 
structure and density of states (3 lectures), Fermi-Dirac distribution (1 lecture), Smearing 
methods (1 lectures), Lattice dynamics (1 lectures), Phonon dispersion relations (1 lecture), 
Force constants (3 lectures), Vibrational thermodynamics (1 lecture) 
 
Molecular dynamics simulations (14 lectures) 
 
Introduction (1 lecture), Potentials (2 lectures), Newtons Equation of motion (2 lectures), 
Algorithms (2 lectures), Simulation parameters (2 lectures), Types of ensembles (2 lectu res), 
Temperature control and data analysis (3 lectures) 
 
Laboratory Experiments 
 
Preparation of input files, Technical parameters optimization, Structure optimization, Electronic 
band structure calculation, density of states calculation, metallic system simulation, phonon band 
structure calculation 
 
 
Text Books 
1. Lee, J., Computational Materials Science: An Introduction, 2nd Edition, CRC Press 2016. 
2. Sholl, D. S., and Steckel, J. A., Density Functional Theory: A Practical Introduction, 1st 
Edition, Wiley, 2009. 
3. Dove, M.T., Introduction to Lattice Dynamics, 1st Edition, Cambridge University Press, 
1993. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
1. Parr, R.G., and Yang, W., Density-Functional Theory of Atoms and Molecules, 1st Edition, 
Oxford Science Publications, 1994. 
2. Raabe, D., Computational Materials Science: The Simulation of Materials, Microstructures 
and Properties, Wiley VCH, 1998. 
 
Online Course Materials 
MIT open courseware:  Gerbrand Ceder, and Nicola Marzari. 3.320 Atomistic Computer 
Modeling of Materials (SMA 5107). Spring 2005. Massachusetts Institute of Technology: 
MIT OpenCourseWare, https://ocw.mit.edu. License: Creative Commons BY-NC-SA 
 
 
 Title Phase Transformations in Solids Number MT7LXX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–2 [4] 
Offered for M.Tech. and Ph.D. Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite  
76 
 
 
Objective 
1. Understanding the correlation between the phase diagram and chemical 
thermodynamics for alloy design. 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Ability to construct multicomponent phase diagrams using computational 
thermodynamic approach. 
2.  Understand the variation of properties with the microstructure evolution during phase 
transformations. 
 
Course Content 
 
Thermodynamics and kinetics: free energy, order of transformation, driving force, 
homogeneous and heterogeneous nucleation, growth kinetics, coarsening, 
precipitation. (8 Lectures) 
Interfaces: atomic mechanisms of diffusion, activation energy, interfacial free energy, 
types of interface (coherent, semi -coherent and incoherent interfaces ), interface 
migration. (6 Lectures) 
Austenite, transformation of austenite, TTT diagram, eutectoid transformation, pearlite 
and bainite transformation. (8 Lectures) 
Martensite transformation: characteristics and nature, morphology, crystallography, 
theory of nucleation and growth, and pre -martensite phenomena, martensitic 
transformation in steel. (6 Lectures) 
Precipitation hardening and spinodal decomposition: Solutionising and ageing, GP 
zones, intermediate phases and structural changes, spinodal decompos ition. (8 
Lectures) 
Order-disorder transformation: common structures in ordered alloys, variation of order 
with temperature; determination of degree of ordering, effect of ordering on 
properties, applications. (6 Lectures) 
 
Laboratory Experiments: Hardenability measurement, Solid -liquid transformation, 
Activation energy calculation, Heat treatment of ferrous metals, Precipitation 
Hardening, TTT Diagram construction. 
  
Text Books 
1. Raghavan, V., Solid State Phase Transformations, 1st edition, Prentice Hall 
India, 1987. 
2. Porter, D.A., Easterling, K. E., and Sherif, M.Y., Phase Transformation in 
Metals and Alloys, 3rd edition, CRC Press, 2009. 
3.   Abbaschian, R., Abbaschian, L., and Reed-Hill, R. E., Physical Metallurgy Principles, 
4th edition, Cengate Learning, 2009. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
1.   Khachaturyan, A.G., Theory of Structural Transformations in Solids, 1st edition, 
Dover publications, 2008. 
2.   Avner, S.H., Introduction to Physical Metallurgy, 2nd edition, McGraw Hill 
Education, 2017. 
 
Online Course Material: 
1. Gururajan, M.P., Phase Transformations and Heat Treatment, Indian 
Institute of Technology Bombay, NPTEL 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113101003/ 
 
 
SYLLABUS FOR ELECTIVES OFFERED BY 
 DEPARTMENT OF METALLURGICAL AND MATERIALS ENGINEERING:  
 
Title Alloy Design : Computational Thermodynamic 
Approach 
Number MT7LXX0 
77 
 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–2 [4] 
Offered for M.Tech Type Elective 
Prerequisite  
 
Objectives 
1. Understanding the correlation between the phase diagram and chemical 
thermodynamics for alloy design. 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Ability to construct multicomponent phase diagrams using computational 
thermodynamic approach. 
2. Ability to learn the assessment of binary phase diagram using PARROT module. 
 
Contents 
1. Thermodynamics of Solution:  Ideal solution, configurational entropy, regular 
solution model, chemical potential, free energy composition diagram, evolution 
of phase diagrams quasichemical theory, Sub regular solution model. (8 
Lectures) 
2. Alloy Design of mul ticomponent system: Redlitch-kister polynomial, Muggianu 
and kohler extrapolation. Crystallography in thermodynamics, Order and 
disorder structure, antisite defect and vacancies. Compound energy formalism. 
Modeling of Interstitial and substitutional phases , stoichiometric and non -
stoichiometric compounds. (14 Lectures) 
3. CALPHAD modeling of non - metallic system. Cluster variance model. (6 
Lectures) 
4. Calculation of thermodynamic parameters:  First principle calculation, Semi -
empirical-Miedema approach. Calorime tric measurement, electrochemical 
measurement, Diffusion couple method. (8 Lectures) 
5. Assessment of thermodynamic system:  Optimization of binary isomorphous 
and eutectic phase diagram using PARROT module. (6) 
 
Lab Experiments 
Construction of equilibrium and non -equilibrium phase diagram, Vertical section 
phase diagram and Property diagram for multi -component alloys, Scheil and 
equilibrium solidification simulation, Liquidus projections and monovariant 
reactions in ternary phase  equilibria, Creation of user defined thermodynamic 
database for Solid solution, Stoichiometric compounds, non -stoichiometric 
compounds.  
 
Textbooks 
1. Saunders   and   Miodownik, CALPHAD (Calculation of Phase Diagrams): A 
Comprehensive Guide, 1st Edition, Pergamman Press, 1998 
2. Hans Lukas , Suzana G. Fries , Bo Sundman , Computational Thermodynamics: 
The Calphad Method, Cambridge University Press, 2007 
 
 
Self-Learning Material 
1. Porter, D.A., Easte rling, K. E., and Sherif, M.Y., Phase Transformation in 
Metals and Alloys, 3rd edition, CRC Press, 2009 
 
Online Course Materials 
1. Murty, B.S., Advanced Metallurgical Thermodynamics , NPTEL Course Material, 
78 
 
Department of Metallurgical and Materials Engineering , Indian Institute of Technology 
Madras, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113106031/. 
  
79 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Title Mineral Engineering Number MT7LXX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.  Type Elective 
Pre-requisite  
 
Objective 
1. To introduce the importance of mineral processing and engineering. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Ability to engineer selective mineral processing. 
 
Course Content 
1. Introduction to Mineral Geology : Geological formation of minerals. Classification and 
identification of minerals. (4 lectures) 
2. Introduction to Mineral Engineering:  Various ore dressing methods, their principles and 
applications. Role of cavitation, Gravity separation, Hea p bioleaching, Fundamentals and 
Plant practices of beneficiation, Surface properties and selective flotation, Mineral 
Liberation: Random and non-random breakage. (10 lectures) 
3. Mineral Processing:  Solid Liquid and Liquid -Liquid processing methods, gas phase  
extraction. (8 lectures) 
4. Metal Recovery:  Phase extraction in metal recovery, Recovery of metals from slag waste, 
Heavy metal removal mechanism. (8 lectures) 
5. Mineral Processing of special materials (from brine and mineral resources), rare earths, 
vanadium, etc.(8 lectures) 
6. Characterization techniques in mineral processing: Rheology studies for flotation slurries. 
7. Simulation and control of column flotation.(4 lectures) 
 
Text Books  
1. Wills, B.A. and Napier-Munn, T.J., Mineral Processing Technology, Elsevier Science & 
Technology Books, 7th Edition, 2006. 
2. Subbarao, D.V., Mineral Beneficiation: A Concise Basic Course, CRC Press, 2011.  
3. Flemings, M.C., Solidification Processing, McGraw Hill, 1974. 
4. German, R. M., Powder Metallurgy & Particulate Materials Processing, Metal Powder 
Industry, 2005. 
 
80 
 
  
Title Iron and Steel Making Number MT7LXX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite  
 
Objective 
1. Introduce principles of iron and steel making and the field of special steels. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Understand the basics of metallurgy involved in iron and steel making. 
2. Describe the overview of processing of iron and steel. 
 
Course Content 
1. Iron making: sequence of operations, raw materials preparation, thermodynamics and 
kinetics. (6 lectures) 
2. Blast furnace: design, internal zones and gas flow, productivity, fuel efficiency, products. 
(4 lectures) 
3. Sponge Iron making and smelting reduction. (4 lectures) 
4. Reactions in steel making: removal of C, Si, Mn, P and S. (8 lectures) 
5. Design and selection of steel making slags and refractories. (8 lectures) 
6. Steel making: basic oxygen furnace processes, electric arc furnace and induction furnace 
steel making. (8 lectures) 
7. Secondary steel making processes, alloy steel making. (2 lectures) 
8. Special steels and their applications. (2 lectures) 
 
 Text Books 
1. Ghosh, A., and Chatterji, A., Ironmaking and Steelmaking: Theory and Practice, Prentice- 
Hall (India), 2008. 
2. Chatterjee, A., Beyond the Blast Furnace, CRC Press, 1994. 
3. Peacey, J.C. and W. G. Davenport, The Iron Blast Furnace: Theory and Practice, 
Pergamon, 1979. 
 
Self-Learning materials 
1. Making, Shaping and Treating of Steel, Vol.1: Iron Making, 11th Ed., AISE Steel 
Foundation, 1999. 
 
 Online Course Materials 
1. Koria, S.C., Steel Making, IIT Kanpur, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113104059 
 
 
 
81 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
] 
 
Title Solidification Processing  Number MT7LXX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite  
 
Objective: 
1. Treat the fundamentals of liquid to solid transformation and practical implication 
to practice.  
2. Processes such as crystal growth, interface stability, splat cooling, ingot casting 
shape casting will be dealt with paying particular emphasis to fundamentals of 
mass transport, heat flow and interface kinetics. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Build up knowledge on fundamentals of solidification of metals and alloys and 
correlating with various casting processes.   
 
Course Content 
1. Casting and related phenomena:  Thermodynamics of nucleation and growth 
phenomena, crystal growth, grain refinement. (4 lectures) 
2. Solidification process: heat flow, plain front solidification, cellular solidification, 
constitutional supercooling, , formation of dendrites, eutectic solidification, 
monotectic solidification,  peritectic growth, effect of pressure on solidification. 
(14 lectures) 
3. Gating system: fluid flow, gating and riser design, Adams‟ and Caine‟s riser 
design, fluidity. (8 lectures) 
4. Solidification during welding, Directional solidification and single crystal 
fabrication. (8 lectures) 
5. Recent developments:  interface kinetics, interface dynamics,   phase selection, 
microstructure selection.  Effect of vibration. Theory convection effects. 
Multicomponent alloys and numerical techniques. (8 lectures)   
 
Text Books 
1. Flemings,  M.C., Solidification Processing, Mcgraw-Hill Book Company, 1974. 
2. Campbell, J., Complete casting Handbook: Metal Casting Processes, Metallurgy, 
Techniques and Design,   Butterworth-Heinmann, 2015. 
1. Minkoff, I.,  Solidification and Cast Structure,  Wiley, 1986. 
 
82 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Title Industrial Waste: Control and Utilization 
 
Number MT7LXX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite  
 
Objective: 
1. Classification of waste products and technological management for their 
environmental sustainability 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Differentiate among the different kinds of waste. 
2. Find optimum method for waste management. 
 
Course Content 
1. Types of waste: Solid, Liquid and gaseous (4 lectures) 
2. Sources of waste: Industrial: Metallurgical, Pharma & Chemical, Electronic, 
Biological (8 lectures) 
3. Recycling of waste: Metal Scrap remelting, Extraction of precious and harmful 
metals from electronic  waste, (8 lectures) 
4. Waste to wealth: Waste for energy, Production of commercial nano particles from 
waste (8 lectures) 
5. Treatment Storage and Disposal of waste:  Long term storage Land filling, 
incineration; Short term storage and container materials (8 lectures) 
6. Case Studies: Nuclear industry, Biomedical industry, Steel industry (6 lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. Pichtel, J., Waste Management Practices: Municipal, Hazardous, and Industrial, 
2nd edition,  CRC Press, 2014. 
2. Choudhary, C. K., Waste management and bioremediation , Oxford Book 
Company, 2012. 
 
Self-Learning materials 
1. Wong, J. W. C, Surampalli, R. Y., Zhang, T. C., Tyagi, R. D., Selvan, A., 
Sustainable Solid Waste Management,  American Society of Civil Engineers, 
2016. 
2. Ojovan, M. I., Handbook of Advanced Radioactive Waste Conditioning 
Technologies, Woodhead Publishing, 2011. 
 
Online Course Material 
1. Dubey, B. K., Electronic Waste Management - Issues and Challenges, Division of 
Environmental Engineering and Management at Indian Institute of Technology, 
Kharagpur, NPTEL, https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc18_ce07/preview 
2. Dubey, B. K., Integrated Waste Management for a Smart City, Division of Environmental 
Engineering and Management at Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, NPTEL, 
https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc17_ce20/preview 
3. Ramachandra, T. V., Municipal Solid Waste Management, Centre for Ecological Sciences, 
Indian Institute of Science, NPTEL, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/120108005/2# 
 
83 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Title Light Metal and Alloys Number MT7LXX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite  
 
Objective 
1. Introduce the prospect of competitive structural materials with high specific strength.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Appreciate the role of light metals for energy savings in different applications/sectors. 
 
Course Content 
1. Introduction: Importance of light metals, overview of light metals production. (4 lectures) 
2. Techniques for melting and solidification: solidification, grain refinement, casting 
processes. (6 lectures) 
3. Heat treatment: grain refinement, strengthening by solid solution, precipitation 
hardening, dispersion of second phase particles. (8 lectures) 
4. Alloy designations and properties: specific alloy systems ((a) Al-alloys, (b) Mg-alloys, (c) 
Ti-alloys). (8 lectures) 
5. Manufacturing and applications: aerospace, biomedical, automobile, domestic appliances. 
(8 lectures) 
6. Novel processing methods: composites, metallic foams, rapid solidification, Quasi 
crystals, amorphous alloys, mechanical alloying, physical vapor deposition, additiv e 
manufacturing. (8 lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. Polmear, I. J., St. John, D., Nie, J. F., Qian, M, Light Alloys, 5th edition, Elsevier 2016. 
2. Brandes E. A. and Brook G. B., Smithells Light Metals Handbook, Elsevier, 1998. 
 
Self-Learning materials 
 
1. Totten G.E. and Mackenzie D.S., Handbook of Aluminum Vol. 1: Physical Metallurgy and 
Processes, CRC Press 2003. 
2. Friedrich H.E., and Mordike B.L., Magnesium Technology, Springer, 2004. 
3.                              Titanium, 2nd edition, Springer, 2007. 
 
 
84 
 
 
 
  
Title Near Net Forming Number MT7LXX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   
 
Objective 
1. Industrial processing technique of near net forming for their applications.  
  
Learning Outcomes 
1. Development of methods used by forging industry. 
  
Course Content 
1. Introduction and Application of Near net forming.(2 lectures) 
2. Manufacturing:  
a. Casting: Robo-casting, additive manufacturing by 3D printing, investment casting, 
near net casting, direct coagulation casting, low pressure injection molding, state 
of the art casting & foam casting. (4 lectures) 
b. Pressure less spark plasma sintering, miniature component s sintering near net 
rolling of soft parts, cross wedge rolling process. (3 lectures) 
c. Spray forming:  electric arc spray forming, spraying -conform process & thermal 
spray forming. (3 lectures) 
d. Extrusion, infiltration, compound forming, precise shape forming , isothermal and 
near isothermal processing, friction stir forming & micro forming. (3 lectures) 
e. Thixo Methods:  semi-solid processing, thixo -forming, thixo extrusion, shape 
forming from colloidal processing, polymer impregnation and pyrolysis. (4 
lectures) 
f. Powder methods: Powder technology & die pressing powders. (3 Lectures) 
g. Other methods:  Net shaped heaping, laser metal deposition, warm spinning of 
cast iron, diffusion bonding, explosive welding, micro -forming, micro deep 
drawing, thermo hydrogen processing, spinning, shear forming and flow forming & 
bulge forming. (8 lectures) 
3. Materials: Bimetal, Ti and its composites, Al alloys (Al -Mg, Al-Ti, Al-Si), Ni super alloys, 
intermetallic porous materials, SiC, etc for different applications. (6 lectures) 
4. Biological applications: Clinical Therapeutics and Health Monitoring. (3 lectures) 
5. Engineering applications:  Turbine Blade, Thermal coatings and Hollow turbine blades. (3 
lectures)  
 
Text Books 
1. Near Net Shape Manufacturing of Metal: A Review of Approaches and Their Evolutions, 
Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers Part B Journal of Engineering 
Manufacture, 2017. 
2. Grant, P. S., Spray forming, Progress in Materials Science, 39, 497-545, 1995. 
3. Waterman, N. A., The Selection of Materials, Engineering Design, 1982. 
 
Further reading 
1. G Giuliano, G., Superplastic Forming of Advanced Metallic Materials, Woodhead, 2011. 
 
 
85 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Course Title Powder Metallurgy Number MT7LXX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite None 
 
Objective 
1. Understand recent concepts in powder metallurgy and product design parameters.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Student will be able to conceptualize the powerful tool of powder metallurgy and directly 
apply to contemporary products. 
 
Course Content 
1. Introduction and application of powder metallurgy. (2 lectures) 
2. Powder production: (8 lectures) 
a. Different production methods namely physical, chemical, mechanical methods. 
b. Single fluid atomization: Rotating electrode atomization, roller atomization, 
rotating disc atomization. 
c. Two fluid atomization: Gas atomization, water atomization, oil atomization etc.  
d. Reduction methods: Carbonyl process, hydride -dehydride process & electrolytic 
method. 
3. Powder characterization:  (10 lectures)  
Particle size and Size distribution using sieving, sedimentation method, Andreasen pipette 
method, size distribution functions like normal distribution, log -normal distribution, 
Rosin-Rammler distribution, particle shape, shape factors, specific surface area of 
powder, flow rate, tap density, apparent density, compressibility, pyrophoricity, 
explosivity and toxicity of powder  
4. Powder compaction:  (4 lectures)  
Die compaction, isostatic pressing, single level and multi -level part compaction, 
repressing, plane strain compression, powder fo rging, powder roll compaction and 
powder extrusion  
5. Sintering: (10 lectures)  
Theory of sintering practice, types of furnaces and atmosphere control, activated 
sintering techniques, post -sintering treatments; industrial sintering practice for ferrous 
and non-ferrous products. 
6. Applications of powder metallurgy: Self-lubricating bearing, magnetic materials, tungsten 
carbide tool bits, bearing materials, dispersion strengthen materials for high temperature 
applications and manufacture of diamond based cutting t ools, brake pads, etc. (8 
lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. German, R.M., Powder Metallurgy and Particulate Materials Processing, MPIF, 2005Sands, 
R.L. and Shakespeare C.R., Powder Metallurgy Practice and Applications, Newness  
2. Publications, 1970.  
3. Upadhyaya, G.S., Powder Metallurgy Technology, Cambridge Press 1996. 
 
Self-Learning materials 
1. Masuda, H., Powder Technology Handbook , Taylor & Francis 2006. Powder Metal 
Technologies and Applications, Metals Handbook, Vol.7, 9th edition, ASM, 1989. 
 
 
Online Course Material 
1. Schuh, C., 3.044 Materials Processing. Spring 2013. Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology: MIT OpenCourseWare, https://ocw.mit.edu. License: Creative Commons BY -
NC-SA. 
 
86 
 
Course Title Thermo Mechanical Processing Number MT7LXX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   
 
Objective 
1. Methodology for developing varying microstructures to meet a range of properties for 
industrial applications.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
2. Development of methods using mechanical working and heat treatment effectively. 
 
Course Content 
1. Introduction: microstructure control, application of heat treatment. (4 lectures) 
2. Effect of mechanical working:  low temperature and dislocation structure, high 
temperature deformation and sub-structure evolution, concurrent relationship between 
flow properties and microstructure evolution. (12 lectures) 
3. Principles of thermo mechanical processing (TMP): single phase versus multi-phase 
materials, sequencing of mechanical working and heat treatment, concurrent 
manipulation of microstructure. (14 lectures) 
4. Application of TMP: deformation induced phase transformation, steel for car body, dual 
phase and TRIP steel, controlled rolling of HSLA steel, electrical steel, patented steel 
wire, aerospace applications (Aluminium, Special alloys). (12 lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. Krauss G., Steels: Processing, Structure and Performance, ASM Int'l Materials Park, 
2005. 
2. Verlinden, B., Driver, J., Samajdar, I. and Doherty, R. D., Thermo-Mechanical 
Processing of Metallic Materials, Elsevier, 2007. 
3. Krauss G., Principles of Heat Treatment of Steel, ASM Intl, 1989. 
 
Suggested References 
1. Sakaia, T., Belyakov, A., Kaibyshev, R., Miura, H. and Jonas, J.J., Dynamic and Post-
Dynamic Recrystallization Under Hot, Cold and Severe Plastic Deformation Conditions, 
Progress in Materials Science 60, 130-207 (2014). 
2. Sherby, O.D., Wadsworth, J., and Nieh, T. G., Superplasticity in Metals and Ceramics, 
Cambridge University Press, 2005. 
 
Web Resources 
1. Shekhar, S. and Gaur, A. Fundamentals of Materials Processing (Part- II)  Department 
of Materials Science and Engineering Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, NPTEL 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113104075/ 
2. Gururajan, M.P. , Phase Transformations and Heat Treatment, Department of 
Metallurgical Engineering and Materials Science, Indian Institute of Technology, 
Bombay, NPTEL, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113101003/ 
3. Schuh, C., 3.044 Materials Processing. Spring 2013. Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology: MIT Open Course Ware, https://ocw.mit.edu. License: Creative Commons 
BY-NC-SA. 
 
 
  
87 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Course Title Material Aspects in Additive Manufacturing  Number MT7LXX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P 
[C] 
3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite None 
 
Objective: 
1. Understanding the metallurgical and materials engineering aspects of additive 
manufacturing. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Ability to learn the additive manufacturing process physics to design and 
fabricate the 3D parts with desired structure and property. 
2. Ability to monitor and control the additive manufacturing (AM) process. 
 
Course Content 
1. AM Overview : Direct Digital Manufacturing and their importance. Different AM 
processes and relevant Process Physics. (5 Lectures) 
2. AM Powder Production and Characterization: Different Mechanical and Chemical 
methods, Atomization of Powder, other emerging processes. Performance 
Evaluation of different processes. Chemical and Microstructural Characterization 
of powders. (6 Lectures) 
3. Transport phenomena model for AM process: Temperature, Fluid Flow and 
Composition. (6 Lectures) 
4. Metallurgical Aspects of AM process: Solidification. Texture. Non-equilibrium 
Microstructure. Residual stress. Process-Structure-Property relationship (8 
Lectures) 
5. Process monitoring and Control for AM: Defects, Geometry, Temperature, 
Composition and Phase Transformation (6 Lectures) 
6. Post processing of AM parts: Support material removal. Machining. Heat 
Treatment. Hot Isostatic Processing. Hybrid manufacturing. (6 Lectures) 
7. Applications of Additive Manufacturing: Additive Manufacturing in Aerospace, 
Automotive, Electronics industries and Biomedical applications. (5 Lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. Gibson I., David W. R., Stucker B., Additive Manufacturing Technologies: 3D 
Printing, Rapid Prototyping, and Direct Digital Manufacturing, Springer, 2nd Ed. 
(2015).  
2. Chua C.K., Leong K.F. and Lim C.S., Rapid prototyping: Principles and 
applications, 3rd Edition, World Scientific, 2010. 
           
Self-learning Materials 
1. Sands, R.L. and Shakespeare C.R., Powder Metallurgy Practice and Applications, Newness 
Publications, 1970. 
2. Majumdar J.D. and Manna I., Laser -assisted fabrication of materials, Springer Series 
in Material Science, 2013. 
 
88 
 
 
Title Plastic Deformation and Microstructure Evolution Number MT7LXX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite  
 
Objective 
1. Provide background to assess the properties and mechanisms which help in optimizing 
the plastic deformation of metals over a wide range of service conditions.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. To provide basic understanding of the reasons that make the metal exhibit variation in 
deformation and strength for metal forming and applications.  
2. Imparting knowledge in metals plastic deformation with respect to their microstructure 
evolution.  
 
Course Content  
1. Deformation behaviour: single crystal vs polycrystalline material, stress-strain curves, 
geometrically necessary dislocations. (4 lectures) 
2. Effect of microstructure on flow properties: Hall-Petch relationship, role of grain-
boundaries. (6 lectures) 
3. Strengthening mechanisms: solid solution strengthening, precipitation hardening, 
grain refinement. (10 lectures) 
4. High Temperature deformation: creep, super-plasticity, dynamic recovery, 
recrystallization and grain growth. (12 lectures) 
5. Deformation behaviour of ceramics and polymeric materials: ductile ceramics, 
plasticity in specific ceramics, dislocation activity in ceramics, non-crystalline polymer, 
crystalline polymer, structure-property relationship in polymers. (10 lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. Dieter, G. E., Mechanical Metallurgy, 3rd Edition, McGraw Hill Book Company, 1986. 
2. Courtney, T. H., Mechanical Behaviour of Materials, 2nd Edition, Waveland Pr. Inc., 
2005. 
3. Shetty, M.N., Dislocations and Mechanical Behaviour of Materials, Prentice Hall India 
Learning Private Limited, 2013. 
 
Suggested References  
1. Honeycombe, R.W.K., The Plastic Deformation of Metals, 2nd Edition, ASM, 1984. 
2. Meyers, M. A. and Chawla, K. K., Mechanical Metallurgy, Principles and Applications, 
Prentice-Hall, Inc 1984. 
 
Online Course Material  
1. Bauri, R.,  Introduction to Materials Science and Engineering, Department of 
Metallurgical & Materials Engineering,  Indian Institute of Technology, Madras, NPTEL 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113106032/       
2. Sundararaman, M., Defects in Materials, Department of Metallurgical and Materials 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Madras, NPTEL 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113106075/ 
3. Krystyn van Vliet. 3.22 Mechanical Behavior of Materials. Spring 2008. Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology: MIT OpenCourseWare, https://ocw.mit.edu. License: Creative 
Commons BY-NC-SA. 
 
 
 
  
89 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Title Corrosion Engineering Number MT7LXX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite  
 
Objective 
 1. Introduce the principles of corrosion and its prevention methods.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Understand the reasons for material degradation under various environments. 
2. Know the methods to minimize/prevent the loss due to corrosion. 
 
Course Content 
1. Thermodynamics and Kinetics:  Causes of corrosion, electrochemical mechanisms, 
corrosion tendency, electrode potentials, The Nernst Equation, Pourbaix Diagrams, 
Polarization and Passivation. (8 Lectures) 
2. Forms of corrosion: Galvanic corrosion, crevice corro sion, pitting corrosion, intergranular 
corrosion, selective leaching, erosion corrosion, stress corrosion, hydrogen damage. (10 
Lectures) 
3. Prevention methods: Materials selection, alteration of environment, design, cathodic and 
anodic protection, coatings. (6 Lectures) 
4. Corrosion in common metals and alloys:  Iron and steel, Copper and Copper alloys, 
Aluminum and Aluminum alloys, Magnesium and Magnesium alloys, Titanium and 
Titanium alloys.(6 Lectures) 
5. Corrosion monitoring : Destructive and Non-destructive methods (6 Lectures) 
6. High temperature oxidation:  Electrochemical and morphological aspects, oxide defect 
structure, kinetics, effects of alloying, high temperature materials. (6 Lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. Fontana, M.G., Corrosion Engineering, 3rd edition, McGraw Hill, 2017. 
2. Revie, W.R. and Uhlig, H.H., Corrosion and Corrosion Control , 4th edition, Wiley, 2008.  
 
Online Course Material 
1. Natarajan, K.A., Advances in Corrosion Engineering, IISc Bangalore, NPTEL, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113108051/ 
 
90 
 
 
 
  
Title Introduction to Dislocations Number MT7LXX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite  
 
Objective 
1. Give a broad overview of dislocations and their interactions in crystals. 
  
Learning Outcomes 
1. The student would know the role of dislocations on properties of materials. 
 
Course Content 
1. Defects in crystals: types of defects, types of dislocations, methods for observation of 
dislocations. (4 lectures) 
2. Movement of dislocations: slip and slip plane, cross-slip and climb. (4 lectures) 
3. Elastic properties of dislocations: forces on dislocations, stress field and strain energy of 
a dislocation. (10 lectures) 
4. Dislocations in different crystals: dislocations in FCC, HCP and BCC metals, and other 
periodic systems. (10 lectures) 
5. Intersection of dislocations: Jogs, movement of dislocations containing elementary jog, 
superjogs, intersection of extended dislocations and extended jogs. (4 lectures) 
6. Multiplication of dislocations: nucleation, Frank-Reed sources, multiple cross-glide, climb 
& grain boundary. (5 lectures) 
7. Dislocation arrays and crystal boundaries: dislocation boundaries, low-angle boundaries & 
steps in interfaces. (5 lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. Hull, D. and Bacon, D. J., Introduction to Dislocations, 4th edition, Butterworth-
Heinemann, 2001. 
2. Hirth, J. P., and Lothe, J. L., Theory of Dislocations, 2nd edition, Krieger, 1982. 
 
91 
 
 
 
  
Course Title Structure-Property-Correlation Number MT7LXX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite None 
 
Objective 
1. To understand the structure-property-correlation in materials. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. To design materials based on their structure for various properties. 
 
Course Content 
1. Structure sensitive properties: classification,   dimensional range of various structural 
features, interrelationship between different structural parameters, effect of structure on 
properties. (10 lectures) 
2. Dynamics of microstructure evolution:   evolution at different length scales and its effect 
on properties, factors influencing the properties, concurrent microstructure evolution and 
properties. (12 lectures) 
3. Application of structure-property correlation: influence of different service conditions, 
effect of alloys systems. (10 lectures) 
4. Computational approaches: constitutive relationship under dynamic conditions, evolution 
of concurrent structure and properties.(10 lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. Meyers, M. A., Chawla, K. K., Mechanical Metallurgy: Principles and Application, Prentice-
Hall, 1983. 
2. Mugharabi, H., Plastic Deformation and Fracture of Materials, VCH Weinheim, 1993. 
3. Krauss, G., Steels: Processing, Structure, and Performance , 2nd Edition, ASM 
International, 2005. 
 
Suggested Reference 
1. Krauss, G., Deformation, Processing, and Structure , ASM Materials Science Seminar, 
American Society for Metals, 1984. 
 
 
92 
 
Title Mechanical Behavior of Materials Number MT7LXX0 
Department  Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P-D 
[C] 
3–0–2-0 [4] 
Offered for M.Tech. and Ph.D. Type Elective 
Pre-requisite  
 
Objectives 
1. To provide background on the mechanisms of deformation in engineering materials, 
and on the evolution of material microstructure when subjected to mechanical stress 
during materials processing and engineering applications 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Ability to design materials with improved mechanical properties and identify failure 
mechanisms in materials for engineering applications 
2. To measure important mechanical properties and correlate with the microstructure  
 
Contents 
Continuum Theory of Deformation:  3D-state of stress and strain, Mohr‟s Circle, Generalized 
Hooke‟s Law and introductory theory of elasticity, stress and strain inva riants, Yield Criteria, 
Yield surface and normality (6 lectures) 
Defects in Crystals:  Vacancies and interstitials, edge, screw and mixed dislocations, Burgers 
vector, slip, cross -slip and climb, stress fields around edge and screw dislocations, strain 
energy of dislocations, dislocation -dislocation interaction: Peach -Koehler force on 
dislocation, image forces, dislocations in different crystal structures (10 lectures) 
Twinning in Crystalline Solids: Deformation twinning, geometry of twin formation, twin sh ape, 
stress requirement for twinning, twinning in HCP, BCC, and FCC crystals (4 lectures)  
Fracture and Toughening Mechanisms Fatigue: theoretical fracture strength of a material and 
Griffith’s Law, modes of fracture, fracture toughness, G and R -curve, brittle and ductile 
fracture, toughening mechanisms in metals, ceramics, and polymers (8 lectures)  
Fatigue and Creep: Introduction to fatigue, stress and strain-life approach, cyclic stress-strain 
curve, fatigue crack propagation, high temperature deformation , fatigue-creep interaction 
(8 lectures) 
Deformation of Polymers: Elasticity in dilute and semi -dilute polymer networks, nonlinear 
elastic deformation, rubber elasticity: Mooney-Rivlin and Ogden models (6 lectures) 
Laboratory Experiments 
Measurement of uni axial monotonic stress -strain response of metals, ceramics, and 
polymers, Measurement of hardness via spherical and Vickers indentation  and correlation 
with yield strength for ductile and brittle materials,  The effect of grain size on mechanical 
properties, The effects of strain rate and temperature on yield strength, Recrystallization of 
cold rolled metals, Measurement of impact fracture toughness using Charpy/Izod impact test, 
Fracture surface interpretation,  Creep of a 60%Sn-40%Pb Solder wire at room temperature. 
Text Books 
1. Dieter, G.E. (1986), Mechanical Metallurgy, 3rd Edition, McGraw-Hill Book Company. 
2. Courtney, T. H., (2005), Mechanical Behaviour of Materials, 2nd Edition, Waveland 
Press Inc. 
3. Shetty, M. N., (2013), Dislocations and Mechanical Behavior of Materials, Prentice Hall 
India Learning Private Limited 
 
Self-Learning Materials 
1. Hertzberg, R.W., (1976), Deformation and Fracture Mechanics of Engineering 
Materials, John Wiley and Sons 
2. McClintock,F.A., and Argon,A.S., (1966), Mechanical Behavior of Materials, Addison-
Wesley. 
 
93 
 
 
  
Title Ceramics Number MT7LXX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite None 
 
Objective 
1. Exposure to range of ceramics and their properties based on structure. 
 
Learning Outcome 
1. Selection of ceramics for various applications. 
 
Course content 
1. Introduction to ceramics: oxide and non-oxide ceramics, their chemical formulae, crystal 
and defect structures, non-stoichiometry and typical properties. (8 Lectures) 
2. Ceramics with special properties: ductile ceramics, transparent ceramics, single crystal, 
thick and thin film ceramics, porous ceramics and ceramic membrane. (10 Lectures) 
3. Properties of ceramics: physical, chemical, mechanical, electrical and optical. (8 Lectures) 
4. Application of different types of ceramics in various industries. (8 Lectures) 
5. Exotic ceramics: functionally graded, smart/intelligent, bio-mimetic and nano-ceramics. 
(8 Lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. Norton, F.H., Elements of Ceramics, Addison-Wesley Press, 1952. 
2. Barsoum, M. and Barsoum, M.W., Fundamentals of Ceramics, CRC Press, 2002. 
3. Kingery, W.D., Bowen, H.K., and Uhlmann, D.R., Introduction to Ceramics, 2nd Ed., 1976. 
 
94 
 
 
 
  
Title Composites Number MT7LXX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite None 
 
Objective 
1. To provide comprehensive background on the processing, properties, and mechanics of 
deformation of composite materials for engineering applications 
 
Learning Outcome 
1. Design and selection of composites for specific applications. 
 
Course content 
1. Introduction and classification of composites: Composites, matrix, reinforcements metal 
matrix composites, polymer matrix composites, ceramic matrix composites (6 Lectures)  
2. Manufacturing of Composite Materials:  Manufacturing techniques, Defects in 
manufactured composites (4 Lectures) 
3. Macro and micromechanics of a lamina: stress-strain relations for anisotropic and 
orthotropic materials, lamina in an arbitrary orientation, strengths of an orthotropic 
lamina, mechanics of materials approach to stiffness and strength, elasticity approach to 
stiffness (9 Lectures) 
4. Macromechanics of a laminate: stress-strain relations for a laminate, in-plane and 
flexural modulus of a laminate, strength of laminates (9 Lectures) 
5. Fracture and Toughening of Composites: fracture processes in composites, toughening 
mechanisms in fibre reinforced plastics and ceramic-matrix composites (6 Lectures) 
6. Designing of Composites: Selection of matrix and reinforcement, Wettability and role of 
interface (4 Lectures) 
7. Applications of different types of composites in various industries and Emerging trends (4 
Lectures)  
 
Text Books 
1. Barbero, E.J., Introduction to Composite Materials Design, Second Edition, CRC Press, 
2011. 
2. Kar, K. K., Composite Materials: Processing, Applications, Characterizations, Springer, 
2017. 
 
95 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Course Title Polymers and Their Composites Number MT7LXX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite None 
 
Objective 
1. Introduce students to the wide range of polymers and their possible combinations with 
other materials for getting desired properties. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. The student will be able to apply the properties of polymers and their composites to 
construction, transport and storage industries. 
 
Course Content 
1.   Introduction: Classification and synthesis of polymers  Basic definitions and nomenclature, 
molar mass and degree of polymerization, synthesis, glass transition temperature and 
crystallinity in polymers, structure and its relation to thermal, chemical, electrical and 
optical  properties. (8 Lectures) 
2.   Mechanical and thermo mechanical characteristics : General characteristics, viscoelasticity, 
deformation behavior of elastomers, deformation mechanisms, fractures, and toughened 
polymers. (8 Lectures) 
3. Polymer processing, characterization and applications : Introduction, plastics, elastomers and 
fibers, compounding and processing techniques, practical aspects of polymer blending, 
standards and engineering applications of polymers. (8 Lectures) 
4.  Polymer composites and their applications (2 Lectures) 
5.  Carbon nanomaterials and synthesis : C-C bonding, types of carbon fullerenes, crystal 
structure of selected carbon nanomaterials: CNT, graphene, nano crystalline diamond, 
synthesis by arc disc harge, thermal CVD, microwave plasma CVD, Laser ablation; growth 
mechanism; special synthesis techniques - vertical aligned growth of CNT, selective area 
growth of CNT, single walled CNT growth, large area graphene synthesis, nano-patterning on 
graphene (16 Lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. Young, R.J., and Peter A. Lovell, Introduction to Polymers , 3rd revised edition, CRC Press, 
2011. 
2. Rudin, A., The Elements of Polymer Science and Engineering , 3rd edition, Academic Press, 
2012. 
3. Koo, J.H., Polymer Nanocomposites: Processing, Characterization, and Applications , 
McGraw-Hill, 2010. 
 
Online Course Material 
1. Adhikari, B., Science and Technology of Polymers, Materials Science Centre, Indian 
Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, NPTEL, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113105028/ 
2. Garg, A., Electro Ceramics, Department of Materials science and Engineering, Indian 
Institute of Technology Kanpur, NPTEL, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113104005/ 
 
96 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Course Title Principles of Engineering Material Selection Number MT7LXX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite  
 
Objective: 
1. Develop comprehensive knowledge on the procedure for selection of materials for 
a wide range of products in engineering applications.  
Learning Outcomes 
1. Relationship between material properties with product and component design.  
2. The methodology of materia ls selection, use of computer -aided selection and 
material data and knowledge sources and their usefulness in industry.  
 
Course Content  
1. Importance of materials : Crystal structure, bonding, processes, and mechanical 
factors in construction/design. Diffusion in materials and interpretation of phase 
diagrams. (6 Lectures) 
2. Selection of materials for a specific application depending on the property and 
performance us ing CES Selector for materials selection : A generalized material 
selection strategy will be introduced together with use of material property charts, 
computer-aided selection, and case studies. (8 Lectures) 
3. Finding and understanding structured information on materials and processes for 
material selection : How to screen information on materials and arrive at a 
conclusion? How to create hybrid materials with combined properties of two or 
three materials? (10 Lectures) 
4. Component/structural failures: Fracture, fatigue, creep, embrittlement, corrosion, 
etc. Detailed survey of typical real life examples of failures from different 
applications – lectures and videos. (10 Lectures) 
5. Applications in technological sectors: Bio-medical, building, high temperature, 
industrial applications, micro -electronics, packaging, transportation, etc. (8 
Lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. Ashby, M.F., Materials Selection in Mechanical Design , 4 th Edition, Butterworth -
Heinemann, 2010. 
2. Callister, W. D., Materials Science and Engineering- An Introduction, John Wiley & 
Sons, 1985. 
 
Suggested References 
1. Shackelford, J. F., Introduction to Materials Science for Engineers , Mac Millan 
Publishing, 1992. 
2. Cottrell, A., An Introduction to Metallurgy, Universities Press, 2000. 
3. Smith, W. F., Materials Science and Engineering , 4 th Edition, Tata McGraw Hill , 
2008. 
4. Van Vlack, L. H., Elements of Material Science and Engineering , 6 th Edition, 
Pearson Education, 2006. 
 
Online Course Material 
1. Granta Design, CES EduPack Software, 2016. 
97 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
M.Tech  & M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree  
 in  
Data and Computational Science 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
98 
 
 
 
(1) Introduction 
Data Science is the art of generating insight, knowledge and predictions by processing of data 
gathered about a system or a process. Computational Science is the art of developing validated 
(simulation) models in order to gain a better understanding of a p henomenon (system‟s or 
processes). Computational sciences focus on development of causal models using latent patterns in 
the observed data, rather than only extracting patterns or knowledge from data by statistical 
methods.  
 
(2) Objective of the Programme 
To produce  professionals with deep knowledge and innovative analytical and computational 
research skills to handle problems in a variety of domains including governance, finance, security, 
transportation, healthcare, energy management, agriculture, popul ation studies, weather 
prediction, economics, social sciences, predictive maintenance, structural health monitoring, smart 
manufacturing and computational structural biology. 
 
(3) Expected Graduate Attributes (M.Tech.) 
1. Skill set to clean, process, analyze,  manage and handle security and privacy aspects of 
structured and unstructured data. 
2. Ability to identify, design and apply appropriate pattern recognition and data mining 
methods for generating relevant insight from data. 
3. Knowledge and capability to develo p and apply machine learning techniques for data driven 
modelling. 
4. Ability to develop models and simulation schemes based upon domain knowledge in chosen 
domains and possible combination with data driven models. 
5. Capability to follow uniquely interdisciplin ary approach for solving problems, using 
knowledge of mathematics, statistics, computing and one or more selected domains among  
physics, chemistry, biology and engineering sciences. 
6. Skill to use and design appropriate visualization techniques for represen tation and 
presentation of insights and solutions.  
7. Ability to innovate and contribute towards next generation data driven technology 
development.  
8. High quality technical communication skills. 
9. Appreciation and adherence to norms of professional ethics.  
10. Ability to plan and manage technical projects. 
 
(4) Learning outcome: 
1. Strong Understanding of fundamentals of Data Mining, Machine Learning,  Modelling & 
Simulation, Optimization and Numerical Techniques. 
2. Basic understanding of Cryptographic and Blockchain Techniques. 
3. Knowledge about basics and use of visual analytics. 
4. Skill set to develop applications using Big Data.  
5. Advanced analytical and data driven modelling and simulation skills to address technological 
challenges in one or more specialized knowledge  domains like physics, chemistry, biology 
and engineering sciences. 
6. Demonstrate skills to communicate scientific ideas and/or application systems.  
7. Acquire project management skills. 
 
 
 
99 
 
(5) Program Structure: 
Cat. Course 
Number 
Course Title L-T-P Credits Cat. Course 
Number 
Course Title L-T-P Credits 
Semester 1 Semester 2 
C MAL7XX0 Introduction to 
Data Science 
1-0-0-0 1 C MAL7XX0 Numerical 
Methods for PDE 
1-0-0-0 1 
C CSL7XX0 Machine 
Learning 1 
3-0-0-0 3 C CSL8XX0 Machine Learning 
2 
3-0-0-0 3 
C MAL7XX0 Mathematics for 
Data Science 
3-0-0-0 3 C CSL7XX2 Software and 
Data 
Architecture* 
1-0-0-0 1 
C MAL7XX0 Statistics 2 2-0-0-0 2 C CSL7XX0 Security and its 
Application 
3-0-0-0 3 
C MAL7XX0 Introduction to 
Modeling 
1-0-0-0 1 C MAP7XX0 Data Analytics 
Lab 
0-0-2-0 1 
E xxxxx PE1 3-0-0-0 3 E Xxxxx PE2 3-0-0-0 3 
C CSP7XX0 Data structures 
and practices 
0-0-2-0 1 E Xxxxx PE3 3-0-0-0 3 
NG xxxxx Technical 
Communication  
1-0-0-0 1 NG xxxxx Innovation and IP 
Management  
 
1-0-0-0 1 
Total 15 Total 16 
Semester 3 Semester 4 
E xxxxx PE4 3-0-0-0 3 E Xxxxx OE2 3-0-0-0 3 
E xxxxx PE5 3-0-0-0 3      
E xxxxx OE1 3-0-0-0 3      
P MA6xx   Project 0-0-
0-5 
5 P MA6xx   Project 0-0-0-
11 
11 
NG xxxxx System 
Engineering and 
Project 
Management 
1-0-
0-0 
1 NG xxxxx Professional Ethics 
 
1-0-0-
0 
1 
Total 15 Total 15 
Grand Total 61 
*A fractal from the course. 
 
 Credit Distribution 
S.No. Category Course  
Category Title 
Total 
Courses 
Total 
Credits 
1 C Compulsory  9 18 
2 C Labs 2 02 
3 PE Program Electives 5 15 
4 OE Open Electives 2 6 
5 P Project 1 16 
Total (without non-graded courses)  57 
 
  
100 
 
(6) Topic Cloud 
Compulsory Topics: 
(a) Data pre -processing (including redundancy removal), Data storage, data 
representation, data handling, data query, data cleaning. 
(b) Relational data bases, graph databases, NoSQL (columnar DB), unstructured data, 
Map reduced techniques and Indexing. 
(c) Distributions, test of hypothesis, stochastic process, queuing process, sampling 
techniques, Probabilistic models, Mixture models, Latent Models, prediction models, 
Association Analysis, Correlation analysis, Evaluation and Validation, performance 
analysis/metrics 
(d) Vector and matrix algebra, Decompositions, SVD, pseudo inverse, rank approximation  
(e) Linear and Non-linear Programming. 
(f) Classification, regression, prediction, c lustering, anomaly detection, feature 
engineering, supervised/ unsupervised Learning, Fundamental of SVM, Kernel 
techniques, States space machine, Markov decision process, ANN, Deep learning and 
its implementation, Deep learning application lab (GPU enviro nment, Python 
environment) , Higher level Machine learning, Transfer learning, online and 
incremental learning, reinforcement learning, explain -ability in Machine Learning, Bias 
variance trade-off, ensemble learning, Auto ML 
(g) Discrete models, continuous mod els, Hybrid models (both analytical and data driven 
models), assumptions, approximations, models validation, MCS 
(h) Numerical methods for PDEs 
(i) Cryptosystems (types) 
  
Elective Topics: 
Financial engineering, Computational finance, Computational Game Theory, Graph Theory, 
Dynamical Systems, Reliability Theory, Stochastic Processes, Representation of Finite Groups, 
Computational linguistics, Computational economics, Digital Humanities, Cultural informatics, 
Blockchain, security and privacy, AR/VR, Natural Langu age Processing and Text analytics, 
Visualization, Machine learning for big data, Human -machine interface, Computational 
modelling in materials design, Bioinformatics, Computational biology, Digital Image Analysis, 
Coding Theory, Robotics, Computational ele ctro magnetism, Computational optics, Quantum 
Information System, Quantum Cryptography, Quantum Computing, Computational Physics, 
Computational material science, Computational chemistry, adaptive numerical methods, 
multi-grid methods, parallel methods, GPU computation. 
 
  
101 
 
 
(7) List of Program Electives 
(a) Electives from sister Departments: 
S.No. Course Title S.No. Course Title 
Department of Mathematics Department of Electrical Engineering 
1 Financial Engineering 19 Digital Image Processing and 
Applications 
2 Computational Game Theory 20 Digital Video Processing 
3 Advanced topics in computational PDE 21 Coding Theory 
22 Compressive Sensing 
4 Dynamical Systems 23 Machine Learning for Communication 
5 Reliability Theory 24 Compressive Sensing 
6 Stochastic Processes 25 Data Compression 
7 Representation of Finite Groups Department of Mechanical Engineering 
8 Shared Computational Economics 26 Robotics 
Department of Humanities and Social 
Sciences 
27 Probabilistic Methods in Engineering 
Department of Physics 
9 Cultural informatics 28 Computational Physics 
Department of Computer Science and 
Engineering 
29 Computational material science 
Department of Chemistry 
10 Computational linguistics 30 Computational Chemistry 
11 Introduction to Virtual and Augmented 
Reality 
Department of Metallurgical and Materials 
Engineering 
12 Natural Language Processing 31 Computational Materials Engineering 
13 Visualization/Data Visualization Department of Biosciences and 
bioengineering 14 Artificial Intelligence 1 
15 Artificial Intelligence 2 32 Omics Technologies 
16 Human Machine Interface 33 Algorithm development 
17 Graph Theory and its Applications 34 Computational modeling in material 
design 17 Bio-image Computing 
18 Computer Vision 35 Applications in Multi Omics data, 
Imaging, Sensors 
 
(b) Electives from IDRPs: 
Digital Humanities 
1 Introduction to Digital Humanities 
Quantum Computing 
2 Introduction to Quantum Information 
3 Quantum Computing 
4 Facets of Quantum Information 
5 Quantum Cryptography and Coding 
  
(c) Specialized electives: 
1 Selected Topics in Data and Computational Science - I (1-0-0-0) 
2 Selected Topics in Data and Computational Science - II (2-0-0-0) 
3 Selected Topics in Data and Computational Science - III (3-0-0-0) 
 
  
102 
 
(8) Content of compulsory courses: 
 
Title Introduction of Data Science Number MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 1–0–0-0 [1] 
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS) Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will:  
1. Introduce the basics of data science and its underlying concepts.  
2. Introduce data processing, manipulation and cleaning techniques. 
  
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Acquire familiarity with the basic concepts of data science. 
2. Distinguish between different kinds of data and data governance. 
3. Understand the preparation and processing of the data. 
 
Contents  
[14 Lectures]  Data preparation, Data pre -processing, Data Cleaning, Data Integration, Data 
Transformation, Data Reduction, Redundancy Removal, Data storage, Data Handling, Querying 
Data, Data Representation and Exploration, Big Data. 
 
Text Books  
1. Kotu, V. and Deshpande , B. (2018) Data Science: Concepts and Practice, Morgan 
Kaufmann. 
2. Saltz, J.S. and Stanton, J.M. (2017) An Introduction to Data Science, SAGE Publications.  
3. Kelleher, J.D., and Tierney, B. (2018) Data Science, MIT Press. 
 
Reference Books  
1. Moreira, J., Carvalho, A. and Horvath, T. (2018) A General Introduction to Data Analytics, 
John Wiley & Sons. 
2. Mayer-Schonberger, V. and Cukier, K., (2013) Big data: The essential guide to work, life 
and learning in the age of insight, John Murray Publications. 
 
Online course Material  
Not Available 
 
 
 
  
103 
 
 
Title Mathematics for Data Science Number MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 1–0–0-0 [1] 
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS) Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will:  
1. Provide an understanding statistical concepts for data scientist. 
2. Train the student to do Matrix Computations for implementing various numerical 
linear algebra algorithms. 
3. Train student in the domain of linear and non-linear programming. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Derive distributional results needed for the statistical hypothesis testing and perform 
the hypothesis testing for the parameters of the normal population. 
2. Understand the numerical linear algebraic methods and their usage for data analysis. 
3. Apply programming concepts for further applications in different areas of interest. 
 
Contents:  
MAL7XX1: Statistical Techniques [1-0-0-0] 
Probability Models and Sampling  Techniques  [3 Lectures]:  Normal, Chi -Square and t 
distributions, Basic concepts of random sampling, sampling from normal distribution, 
properties of sample mean and sample variance. 
Tests of Hypotheses [5 Lectures]: Basic concepts of statistical hypotheses testing-simple and 
composite hypotheses, critical regions, Type -I and Type-II errors, size and power of a test, 
Neyman Pearson lemma, tests for one -sample and two -sample problems from normal 
populations. 
Stochastic Processes  [6 Lectures]:  Definition and classification of general  stochastic 
processes; Markov Chains: definition, transition probability matrices, classification of states, 
limiting properties; Poisson process, Birth and death processes, exponential queuing model.  
 
MAL7XX2: Matrix Computations [1-0-0-0] 
Matrix Algebra [3 Lectures]:  Matrix operations and type of matrices, Rank of Matrix,  
Eigenvalues, Eigenvectors and Diagonalizable matrices, Vector Norms, Matrix Norms. 
Decompositions [9 Lectures]:  Spectral decomposition, Schur Decomposition, QR 
Factorization, Singular value decomposition (SVD), Polar Decomposition, Pseudo Inverse. 
Approximations [2 Lectures]: Least square approximations, Low-Rank Approximation. 
 
MAL7XX3: Optimization [1-0-0-0] 
Linear Programming Problem  [4 Lectures] : Linear combination of vectors, Convex  set, 
Convex hull, Linear programming problem, feasible solution, basic feasible solution, 
graphical solution, Simplex method, Charne‟s M method. 
Duality and IPP [6 Lectures]: Dual of an LPP, Integer Programming, Gomory‟s cut -constraint 
method.  
Nonlinear Programming [4 Lectures] : First and second order conditions, Constrained 
optimization - Lagrange Multipliers, Karush-Kuhn-Tucker conditions. 
 
Text Books  
     (Fractal 1) 
1. Casella, G. and Berger, R. (2002), Statistical Inference, Cengage Learning. 
2. Ross, S.M. (1996), Stochastic Processes, Wiley. 
104 
 
 
     (Fractal 2) 
3. Mayer, C.D. (2000) Matrix Analysis and Applied Linear Algebra, SIAM. 
4. Strang, G., (2006), Linear Algebra and its Applications. 
5. Elden, L. (2007) Matrix Methods in Data Mining and Pattern Recognition, SIAM. 
 
     (Fractal 3) 
6. Luenberger, D. G., Linear and Nonlinear Programming , Yinyu Ye, Third  Edition, 
Springer, 2008 
7. Kambo, N. S., Mathematical Programming Techniques,  Second Edition, Affiliated East 
West Press, 2005 
 
Reference Books  
     (Fractal 1) 
1. Rohatgi, V.K. and Saleh, A.K.M.E. (2018). An Introduction to Probability and 
Statistics, Wiley.  
2. Ross, S.M. (2010). An Introduction to Probability Models, Elsevier. 
3. Hoel, P.G., Port, S.C. and Stone, C.J. (1972). Introduction to Stochastic Processes, 
Houghton Mifflin Company. 
 
(Fractal 2) 
4. M    Goloub, G.H. and Charles, F.V.L. (2013) Matrix Computations, JHU Press. 
5. Lancaster, P. and Tismenetsky, M. (1985) The Theory of Matrices: With Applications, 
Academic Press. 
 
(Fractal 3) 
6. Bazaraa, M. S., Sherali, H.D., and Shetty, C. M., Nonlinear Programming: Theory and 
Algorithms, Third Edition, Wiley publications, 2006 
7. Darst, R, Introduction to Linear Programming: Applications and Extensions , Dekker 
Publications, 1991 
 
 
Online course Material  
(Fractal 2) 
1. Agrawal, P.N., Numerical Linear Algebra, NPTEL course material,  Department of 
Mathematics, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee,  
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107106/ 
(Fractal 3) 
2. Goswami A., Chakraborty D., Optimization, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Mathematics, Indian Institute of Technology Kharaggpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111105039/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
105 
 
Title Advanced Statistical Techniques Number MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 2–0–0-0 [2] 
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS) Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will:  
1. Provide an understanding of the statistical concepts and their real-life applications. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Estimate the parameters of the underlying population; 
2. Gain the basic knowledge of mixture models, latent models, association, correlation and 
regression analysis. 
 
Contents: 
  
Estimation [ 4 Lectures]:  Point estimation -maximum likelihood estimator, methods of evaluating 
estimators; Interval estimation- Methods of finding confidence intervals. 
 
Mixture Models and Latent Models [3 Lectures]: Basic ideas, finite mixtur es, continuous mixtures, 
conditional mixing distributions; Latent models. 
 
Association and Correlation Analysis [7 lectures]:  Categorical data, consistency of data, 
independence and association of attributes; Measures of association – Pearson‟s and Yule‟s 
measures, Goodman -Kruskal‟s γ, Odds Ratio; Fitting of logit model through least squares, 
Properties of product moment correlation coefficient, Spearman‟s rank correlation coefficient.  
 
Regression Analysis [14 lectures]: Model building, data collection, uses of regression; Simple linear 
regression model - Least-Squares estimation of the parameters, hypothesis testing on the slop and 
the intercept, interval estimation, prediction of new observations, coefficient of determination; 
Multiple linear regression  model - estimation of the model parameters, hypothesis testing, 
confidence intervals, prediction of new observations; Model adequacy checking -residual analysis; 
Validation techniques. 
 
 
Text Books  
1. Casella, G. and Berger, R. (2002). Statistical Inference, Cengage Learning. 
2. Marshall, A.W. and Olkin, I. (2007). Life Distributions: Structure of Nonparametric, 
Semiparametric and Parametric families, Springer. 
3. Gun, A.M., Gupta, M.K. and Dasgupta, B. (1998): Fundamentals of Statistics (V -1), World 
Press. 
4. Montgomery, D.C., Peck, E.A. and Vining, G.G. (2012). Introduction to Linear Regression 
Analysis, Wiley. 
 
Reference Books  
1. Rohatgi, V.K. and Saleh, A.K.M.E. (2018). An Introduction to Probability and Statistics, 
Wiley. 
2. Draper, N.R. and Smith, H. (1998). Applied Regression Analysis, Wiley. 
3. Ross, S. (2012). Simulation, Academic Press 
 
Online course Material  
1. Panchenko, D., Statistics for Applications, Massachusetts Institute of Technology: MIT Open 
Courseware, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/mathematics/18 -443-statistics-for-applications-
fall-2006/#. 
 
 
  
106 
 
 
Title Introduction to Modeling  Number MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 [1] 
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS) Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce various modeling techniques 
2. Explain how to analyses mathematical models 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Model a given scenario using appropriate mathematical techniques 
2. Analyze and draw conclusions about the process/system under consideration 
 
Contents  
 
Principles of mathematical modeling [4 lectures]: Assumptions, approximations, abstraction, scale, 
conservation and balance principles, dimensional homogeneity and consistency, model validation  
 
Modeling Methods [10 lectures]: Continuous models, discrete models, models of hybrid systems, 
use of differential equations, variational principles, Data driven models. 
 
Textbooks  
1. Gershenfeld, N. (1999) The Nature of mathematical modelling, Cambridge University Press.  
2. Haberman, R. (1998) Mathematical models, SIAM. 
 
Reference Books  
1. Dym, C.L. (2004) Principles of mathematical modeling, Academic Press. 
2. Boccara, N. (2010) Modeling complex systems, Springer. 
  
Online Course Material  
Not available 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
107 
 
Title Numerical Methods for PDE Number MAL8XX1 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 1–0–0-0 [1] 
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS)/Ph.D.(MA) Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will  
1. Introduce finite difference schemes for numerical solutions of partial differential equations. 
2. Carry out numerical analysis of various finite difference schemes.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply finite difference schemes for numerical solution of partial differential equations. 
2. Undertake out error analysis and stability analysis of finite difference schemes 
 
 
Contents  
[8 Lectures]  Characterization of PDEs, Finite difference methods for elliptic, parabolic and 
hyperbolic problems. 
 
[6 Lectures]  Stability, consistency and convergence theory, dissipation and dispersion, error 
estimates. 
 
Text books  
1. Quarteroni, A. and Valli, A. , Numerical Approximation of Partial Differential Equations, 
Springer, 1997 
2. Morton, K. W.  and Mayers, D. F. , Numerical solution of partial differential equations, CUP, 
2005 
 
Reference Books  
1. Thomas, J. W. , Numerical partial differential equations: Finite difference methods, Springer, 
1995 
2. Trefethen, L. N. and David Bau III, Numerical Linear Algebra, SIAM, 1997 
 
Online Course Material  
1. Nayak, A. K. , Numerical methods: Finite Difference Approach, NPTEL  Course Material, 
Department of Mathematics, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107107/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
108 
 
 
Title Data Analytics Lab Number MAP7XX0 
Department Mathematical L-T-P-D [C] 0–0–2-D [1] 
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS) Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will  
1. Introduce the basics of R software and then train to write scripts, create a work 
environment, and data handling and data visualization.  
2. Enable students to be able to analyse the data using R. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand R language fundamentals and basic syntax. 
2. Comprehend What R is and how it‟s used to perform data analysis. 
3. Create their own R code for visualizations of data. 
 
Contents  
Basic calculations with R, Descriptive statistics [3 Labs]: Introduction to R Software, Basics  and 
calculations with Data Vectors, Built -in-commands and Missing Data Handling, Operations with 
Matrices,  Variables and Types of Data,  Absolute, relative frequency and frequency distribution, 
Graphs and plots. 
 
Central tendency of data and Variation in data [4 Labs]:  Arithmetic Mean, Median, Quantiles, 
Mode, Geometric Mean and Harmonic Mean, Range, Interquartile Range and Quartile Deviation, 
Absolute Deviation and Absolute Mean Deviation, Mean Squared Error, Variance and Standard 
Deviation, Coefficient of Variation and Boxplots. 
 
Moments, Association of Variables, Fitting of Linear Models [7 Labs]: Central Moments, Absolute 
Moments and Computation of Moments, Skewness and Kurtosis, Univariate and Bivariate Scatter 
Plots, Quantile in 3D plots, Correlation Coefficient, Rank Correlation Coefficient, Measure of 
Association for Discrete and Counting Variables, Least Squares Method. 
 
Text Books  
1. Wickham, H. and Grolemund, G. (2016) R for Data Science: Import, Tidy, Transform,  
Visualize, and Model Data, 'O'Reilly Media, Inc. 
2. Toomey, D. (2014) R for Data Science, Packt Publishing Ltd. 
3. Healy, K. (2018) Data Visualization: A Practical Introduction, Princeton University Press.  
 
Reference Books  
1. Knell, R.J. (2014) Introductory R: A Beginner‟s Guide to Data Visualisation,  
2. Stinerock, R. (2018) Statistics with R: A Beginner's Guide, SAGE publication. 
 
Online Course Material  
1. Shalab, Descriptive Statistics with R Software, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Mathematics and Statistics, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur,  
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111104120/  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
109 
 
(9) Content of Elective courses: 
 
Course Title Dynamical Systems Course No. MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA) Type Elective 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
1. To introduce the concept of linear and nonlinear dynamical systems. 
2. To learn the basic concepts in dynamical systems, like, evolution of system, fixed points, 
periodic points, attractors, bifurcation process and stability of the systems. 
3. To understand the nonlinearity in nature and study of the nonlinear models in engineering 
and its dynamics. 
4. Use Matlab and simulink for solving dissipative dynamical systems, which are relevant for 
engineering models.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Construction of phase portraits of nonlinear system and understanding of fundamental 
difference between linear and nonlinear systems. 
2. Identification of attractors, like, fixed points, periodic attractors, Cantor sets, Chaotic attrac tor 
and in the continuous case, limits cycles.  
3. Understanding the different bifurcations, like, saddle node, period doubling etc. 
 
Contents  
Linear and Nonlinear Dynamical Systems [Lectures 12]: History of Dynamics, The importance of 
being Nonlinear, A Dynamical view of the world, Examples of dynamical systems, Uncoupled 
Linear systems, Diagonalization, Exponential of operators, Linear systems in R^2 and Stability 
theory, Nonhomogeneous Linear systems, Nonlinear differential equations, Vector field of 
nonlinear systems, Phase portrait, Limit cycles and their stability. 
 
One-dimensional Discrete maps [Lectures 12]: Logistic maps, period doubling bifurcations, Flip 
and tangent bifurcations, Periodic windows, Intermittency transcritical, Lyapunov exponent, 
Universality and Experiments. 
 
Dynamics of Continuous and Discrete Systems: [Lectures 18] : Lorenz equations, Rossler 
Equation, Chua's circuit, Forced pendulum, Stable and Unstable manifolds, Basin boundary, 
Horseshoe maps, Boundary crisis, Interior crisis, Statistics of Chaotic attractor, Frequency 
spectra of orbits, Matrix times circle. 
 
Textbook 
1. Steaven, S., Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos: With Applications to Physics, Biology, 
Chemistry, and Engineering, 1st Ed., Levant Books, 2007 
2. Alligood, K., Sauer, T., and Yorke, J., Chaos:  An Introduction to Dynamical Systems , 
Second Edition, Springer, 2008. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Devaney, R.L., An Introduction to Chaotic Dynamical Systems, Addison Wesley, 2005. 
2. Holmgren, A.R., A First course in discrete dynamical systems, Springer. 
 
Online course Material  
1. Banerjee S., NPTEL Course on Chaos, Fractals and Dynamic Systems, Department of 
Electrical Engineering, IIT Kharagpur https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108105054/ 
 
 
 
 
  
110 
 
 
Title Stochastic Processes Number MAL8XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA) Type Elective  
Prerequisite Probability and Linear Algebra   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide background in the area of Random Processes. 
2. Provide sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by students for further 
applications in their respective domains of interest. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Develop basic understanding of the Stochastic Process, Random Walk and Martingales. 
2.  Impart knowledge in Markov Chain, Birth and Death Process, Brownian Motion, Stochastic 
Calculus 
 
Contents  
[4 Lectures]  Conditional probability and conditional expectation, properti es of conditional 
expectation. 
 
[8 Lectures]  Stochastic processes, stationarity, finite -dimensional distributions, stopping times, 
stopped sigma -fields and processes, right -continuous and canonical filtrations, adapted and 
previsible processes. 
 
[8 Lecture s] Random walk; Gaussian distribution: for variables, vectors and processes, non -
degeneracy, stationarity, closeness under 2-mean convergence. 
 
[12 Lectures]  Brownian motion, Gaussian construction, independence of increments, scaling and 
time inversion, Le vy's martingale characterization, reflection principle, law of its maximum in an 
interval and first hitting time of positive levels, modulus of continuity, quadratic and total variation. 
Related processes: Geometric Brownian motion, Brownian bridge, Ornste in-Uhlenbeck process and 
martingales. 
 
[10 Lectures] Poisson distribution, approximation, rate, construction, independence of increments, 
memoryless property of the Exponential law, the dual process of independent Exponential inter -
arrivals, the order statistics of independent uniform samples. 
 
Textbook  
1. Ross, S. M. (2018), Stochastic Processes, Wiley 
 
Reference Books  
1. Ross, S. M. (2005), Introduction to Probability Models, Elsevier 
2. Shreve, S. E. (2008), Stochastic Calculus for Finance II, Springer 
 
Online course Material  
1. Wu, H., Introduction to Stochastic Processes, Massachusetts Institute of Technology: MIT 
Open Courseware, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/mathematics/18-445-introduction-to-
stochastic-processes-spring-2015/. 
 
 
 
  
111 
 
 
Title Computational Game Theory Number MAL8XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA) Type Elective 
Prerequisite Basics of Optimization Theory   
 
Objectives  
1. Provide background in the area of computational game theory. 
2. Provide  sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by students for further 
applications in their respective domains of interest. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Understanding of fundamentals like Nash equilibrium, dominant strategies and their 
applications.  
2. Basic understanding of the Co-operative games, iterated games and mixed strategies. 
3. Knowledge of non-co-operative games, Zermelo‟s algorithm and their applications.  
 
Contents  
[12 lectures]:  Von Neumann and Morgenstern utility functions, expected utili ty and expected 
utility maximization, Paradoxes of expected utility maximization, Compact representations for 
preference relations, Dichotomous preferences and goals. Representations for specifying goals,  
Strategic Form Non -Cooperative Games, Basic model and solution concepts, pure strategy Nash 
equilibrium, dominant strategies, notable games, coordination games and focal points, complexity 
of pure strategy Nash equilibrium. 
 
[14 Lectures]: Mixed strategies: Nash‟s theorem and Nash equilibrium, Computing m ixed strategy 
Nash equilibria, Lemke -Howson algorithm, Zero sum games, Minimax Theorem, Compact 
representations for strategic form games, Boolean games, congestion games, Iterated Games: 
Finitely repeated games and backward induction, Infinitely repeated g ames, measuring utility over 
infinite plays modelling strategies as finite state machines with output (Moore machines); The Folk 
theorems, Iterated Boolean games, Axelrod‟s tournament, the Hawk -Dove game, evolutionary 
game theory, evolutionarily stable strategies. 
 
[16 lectures]:  Extensive Form Non -Cooperative Games: Zermelo‟s algorithm and backward 
induction, subgame perfect equilibrium, Zermelo‟s theorem, Compact representations for 
extensive form games, PEEK games and EXPTIME -completeness results, the Ga me Description 
Language (GDL), Imperfect information games, PEEK games with incomplete information, 
Cooperative Games: Transferable utility (TU) characteristic function games, basic model, stability 
& fairness solution concepts, cost of stability, Shapley value, Banzhaf index, induced subgraph 
representation, marginal contribution nets, Simple TU games, swap and trade robustness, 
weighted voting games, vector weighted voting games, network flow games, NTU games and their 
representations  
 
Textbooks 
1. G. Ch alkiadakis, E. Elkind, and M Wooldridge, Computational Aspects of Cooperative Game 
Theory, Morgan-Claypool, 2011.  
2.  Machler, E. Solan, S. Zamir, Game Theory, Cambridge U.P., 2013.   
3. M. J. Osborne, An Introduction to Game Theory, Oxford U.P., 2004. 
 
Reference Books  
1. R. D. Luce and H. Raiffa, Games and Decisions, Wiley, 1958  
2.  M. J. Osborne and A. Rubinstein, A Course in Game Theory, 1994. 
 
Online course Material  
Not Available 
 
  
112 
 
 
Title Advanced topics in Computational PDE Number MAL8XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA) Type Elective  
Prerequisite ODEs, PDEs and numerical methods   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce multi-grid methods, 
2. Introduce parallel computing methods, 
3. Explain use multi-grid methods and parallel computing methods. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability  
1. to solve partial differential equation using multi-grid methods, 
2. to speed up computations using parallel numerical methods. 
 
Contents  
 
Multi-grid methods [20 lectures] : Review of classical finite difference schemes for numerical 
solution of partial differential equations, Fourier analysis for error propogation, influence of grid 
parameters, grid hierarchies, multi -grid cycles, convergence monitors, smoother, W -cycle and 
nested iteration, coarse -grid solver, multigrid as a preconditioner, Numerical implementations 
with Diffpack programming 
 
Parallel Computing [20 lectures] : Need for parallel computation, different hardware 
architectures, message -passing programming model, multicomputer model, OPEN MP, MPI, 
CUDA, parallel linear algebra operations, parallel algorithms for linear systems with special 
structures, parallel impl ementation of direct and iterative methods for solution of linear 
systems, parallelizing finite difference schemes (wave Equation, heat condunction equation)  
 
 
Textbooks  
1. Langtangen H. P. and Tveito, A. (Editors) (2003) Advanced topics in computational 
partial differential equations: Numerical methods and Diffpack programming, Springer 
2. Briggs, W. L., Henson, V. E., and McCormick, S. F. (2000) A multigrid tutorial, 2nd Ed., 
SIAM 
3. Grama, A., Gupta, A., Karypis, G., and Kumar, V. (2003) Introduction to paralle l 
computing, 2nd Ed,  Pearson 
 
Reference Books  
1. Quarteroni, A. and Valli, A. (1997), Numerical approximations of partial differential 
equations, 2nd Edition, Springer 
2. Bertsekas, D. P. and Tsitsiklis, J. N. (1997) Parallel and distributed computation: 
Numerical methods, Prentice-Hall 
  
Online Course Material  
1. M. Ramakrishna, Introduction to computational fluid dynamics, NPTEL course material, 
Department of Aerospace Engineering Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 
https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/101106045/ 
2. Subodh Kumar, Parallel Computing,  NPTEL course material, Department of Computer 
Science and Engineering Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106102114/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
113 
 
Title Financial Engineering Number MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA) Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Securities Pricing Securities, Risk Management Assessment, prediction  and decision making, 
under uncertainty, regarding future events and their consequences 
2. Portfolio Optimization Balancing risk and return 
3. Modeling Pricing of derivatives and Itos calculus 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Valuation of financial portfolio 
2. Pricing of financial derivatives (options and contracts) 
3. Understanding risk and return 
 
Contents  
 
[18 lectures] Introduction to financial markets and financial instruments, financial derivatives, risk 
and return, risky and risk free assets, interest rates, bonds, bonds pricing, spot and forward rates, 
investment portfolio, mean-variance analysis, capital asset pricing model, arbitrage pricing theory. 
 
[22 lectures]  Discrete time models, stock and money market models, pri nciple of no arbitrage, 
pricing of contracts (forward and future), options, put -call parity, option pricing, martingales, 
Binomial model, CRR model, Black -Scholes formula, Greeks, random walk, Brownian motion, 
stochastic process, Itos integral and Ito-Deoblins formula. 
 
Textbook  
1. M. Capinski and T. Zastawniak (2010). Mathematics for finance: an introduction to financial 
engineering, Springer.  
2. S.N. Neftci (2009). Principles of financial engineering. Academic Press/Elsevier. 
 
Reference Books  
1. J.C. Hull (2011). Options, futures and other derivatives. Pearson India. 
2. S.E. Shreve (2000). Stochastic calculus for finance I: The binomial asset pricing model, 
Springer 
 
Online Course Material 
Not Available 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
114 
 
Title Reliability Theory Number MAL8XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA)  Type Elective 
Prerequisite Probability and Statistics   
 
Objectives  
1. To understand the basic concepts of statistical reliability theory and their various real -life 
applications. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. Understand the basic notion of systems, different reliability measures, different notions of 
ageings, different semiparametric models, shock models and dependence structures; 
2. Gain the ability to handle different issues in system reliability. 
 
Contents  
Basic Notion of Systems [6 lectures] : Structure function , coherent systems, k-out-of-n systems, 
dual structures, cut and path sets, modular decomposition. 
 
Reliability Measures [5 lectures] : Survival/Reliability functions, hazard rate function, reversed 
hazard rate function, residual lifetime, inactivity time, mean residual lifetime function, mean 
inactivity time, reliability bounds. 
 
Semiparametric Models [6 lectures]: Common life distributi ons, scale model , proportional hazard 
rate model, proportional reversed hazard rate model, proportional odds model, proportional mean 
residual lifetime model. 
 
Stochastic Ageings [8 lectures]:  Notions of stochastic ageing, different ageing classes, ageing 
properties of common life distributions, closure properties of different ageing classes under 
formation of coherent structures, convolutions and mixtures. 
 
Shock Models and Dependence Structures [7 lectures]:  Univariate and bivariate shock models, 
notions of bivariate and multivariate dependence structures. 
  
Issues in System Reliability [10 lectures]:  Maintenance and replacement policies, availability of 
repairable systems, optimization of system reliability with redundancy. 
 
Text Books  
1. Barlow, R.E. and Proschan, F. (1975). Statistical Theory of Reliability and Life Testing . Holt, 
Rinehart and Winston, New York. 
2. Lai, C.D. and Xie, M. (2006). Stochastic Ageing and Dependence for Reliability . Springer, 
New York. 
3. Marshall, A.W. and Olkin, I. (2007). Life Distributions. Springer, New York. 
 
Reference Books  
1. Barlow, R.E. and Proschan, F. (1965). Mathematical Theory of Reliability. Wiley, New York. 
2. Samaniego, F.J. (2007). System Signatures and their Applications in En gineering 
Reliability. Springer, New York.  
 
Online Course Material 
Not Available 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
115 
 
 
Title Representations of finite groups Number MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA) Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
1. The goal of this course is to give an introduction to representation theory and to understand 
representations of symmetric groups. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Representation theory and characters of finite groups. 
2. Representation theory of Symmetric groups. 
 
Contents 
Group Action and Modules [6 Lectures]: Groups and Examples (Recall), Group action, Conjugacy 
Classes, Modules: Definition and Examples. 
 
Basic concepts of Representation Theory [10 Lectures]: Representations and basic          
examples, FG-modules, Group algebra, Irreducible representations, complete reducibility and 
Maschke‟s theorem, Schur‟s lemma. 
 
Characters and Burnside’s pq Theorem [10 Lectures]: Character theory of representations, 
orthogonality relations, decomposition of the regular representation. Character Tables of some 
groups, Characters and Algebraic Integers, Burnside‟s pq-theorem. 
 
Representation theory of symmetric groups [16 Lectures]: Tensor products, Restriction of a 
representation, induced representations, Frobenius reciprocity, Mackey‟s irreducibility criterion, 
Representation theory of symmetric groups, Few applications of Representation Theory (if time 
permits). 
 
Text Books 
1. Benjamin Steinberg, Representation Theory of Finite Groups, Springer (Universitext ), 
2012. 
2. Gordon James and Martin Liebeck, Representations and Characters of Groups, Cambridge 
University Press, 2001. 
 
Reference Books 
1. William Fulton and Joe Harris, Representation Theory: A First Course, Springer (Graduate 
Texts in Mathematics 129), 1991. 
2. Amritanshu Prasad, Representation Theory: A Combinatorial Viewpoint, Cambridge 
University Press, 2015. 
 
Online Course Material 
Not Available 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
116 
 
Title Computational Linguistics Number CSL8XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech./PhD Type Elective  
Prerequisite Basic Probability Theory   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Enable students to develop computational models for languages. 
2. Introduced linguistic structure of an unfamiliar language in terms of morphology, syntax, 
and orthography. 
3. Impart knowledge of linguistic descriptions of a language combined with some textual 
resource in the language. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Do an exhaustive search of resources in and about a language without many resources. 
2. Resolve technical, logistical, and ethical issues involved in constructing a keyboard layout 
for a language's morphology and orthography. 
3. Design and implement general approaches in rule-based machine translation. 
 
Contents  
 
Introduction [2 Lectures] : Definition of computational linguistics, Ambiguity and uncertainty in 
language, The Turing test. 
Regular Expressions  [6 Lectures] : Chomsky hierarchy, regular languages, and their limitations, 
Finite-state automata, Practical regular expressions for finding and counting language phenomena, 
morphology, syntax and orthography. 
String Edit Distance  [6 Lectures]: Key algorithmic tool: dynamic programming, optimal alignment 
of sequences, String edit operations, edit distance, spelling correction, and machine translation.  
Context Free Grammar  [4 Lectures]: Constituency, CFG definition, use and limitations. Chomsky 
Normal Form, Top-down parsing, bottom-up parsing, Efficient CFG parsing with CYK, Earley parser.  
Language modelling [10 Lectures]: Definition of information and its measurement, noisy channel 
model, the language Shannon game, Entropy, cross -entropy and information gain for language 
phenomena, Probabilistic language modelling and its applicat ions, estimating the probability of a 
word, and smoothing, Generative models of language and their application to building an 
automatically-trained email spam filter, and automatically determining the language. 
Part of Speech Tagging  [4 Lectures] : The concept of parts -of-speech, examples and usage, the 
Penn Treebank and Brown Corpus, Collocations and Noun Phrase Parsing. 
Word Sense Disambiguation and Clustering  [10 Lectures] : Homonomy, polysemy, different 
meanings, the power of context, Language neighbo urhood as a vector, Agglomerative clustering, 
Clustering by expectation maximization, Using clustering to discover different word senses, Semi -
supervised document classification.  
 
Textbook  
1. Grishman, R. (1986) Computational Linguistics: An Introduction, C ambridge University 
Press. 
2. Rosner, M. and Johnson, R. (1992) Computational Linguistics and Formal Semantics, 
Cambridge University Press. 
3. Jurafsky, D. (2000) Speech & Language Processing, Pearson Education India. 
 
Reference Books  
1. Mitkov, R. (2004) The Oxford Handbook of Computational Linguistics, Oxford University 
Press. 
2. Manning, C.D. and Schütze, H. (1999) Foundations of Statistical Natural Language 
Processing, MIT Press. 
 
Online Course Material 
 
  
117 
 
 
Title Computational Economics Number MAL8XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA) Type Elective  
Prerequisite Basic knowledge of Optimization techniques   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Enable students to understand computational economic models. 
2. Impart knowledge to design expressive marketplaces. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Do an exhaustive search of computational economic models. 
2. Analyse expressive marketplaces. 
3. Design and implement optimal market mechanisms. 
 
Contents  
[6 Lectures]  Definition of computational economics, basic techniques from mathematics, Linear 
programming, (Mixed) integer linear programming, Computational problems, Algorithms, Runtime 
of algorithms, Easy and hard problems. 
 
[12 Le ctures] Single-item auctions, Combinatorial auctions, Bidding languages, Winner 
determination problem, Reverse auctions and exchanges, Expressive financial securities, Barter 
exchanges/matching markets. 
 
[12 Lectures] Kidney exchange, Expressive negotiatio n over donations, Voting and social choice, 
Iterative mechanisms/preference elicitation.  
 
[12 Lectures]  Risk neutrality and risk aversion, Expected utility theory, Incentive compatibility, 
Individual rationality, Revelation principle, Clarke mechanism, Groves mechanisms, Automated 
mechanism design and Proper scoring rules. 
 
Textbook  
1. Miranda, M.J. and Fackl er, P.L. (2004) Applied Computational Economics and Finance, MIT 
Press. 
2. Afonso, O. and Vasconcelos, P.B. (2015) Computational Economics: A concise introduction, 
Routledge. 
 
Reference Books  
1. Stokey, N.L. (1989) Recursive Methods in Economic Dynamics, Harvard University Press. 
2. Chen, S.-H., Kaboudan, M. and Du, Y. -R. (2018) The Oxford Handbook of Computational 
Economics and Finance, Oxford University Press. 
 
Online Course Material 
 
 
 
 
 
  
118 
 
Title Computational Chemistry Number CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS) Type Elective 
Pre-requisite         
      
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Describe knowledge of modern techniques in computational methods applied in chemistry.  
      
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
1. Use modern computational chemistry techniques to solve fundamental problems related to 
chemistry. 
 
Contents 
Basics: Fundamentals of quantum, classical, and statistical mechanics, mathematical techniques 
(10 lectures) 
Electronic structure: Variation theory, perturbation theory, electron spin, He atom, Pauli exclusion 
principle, Slater determinant (6 lectures)  
Electronic structure of diatomic molecules: Born Oppenheimer approximation, Atomic uni ts, H2+ 
ion, H2 molecule, VB theory, MO theory (8 lectures)  
Wave function based theory: Hartree -Fock theory, Electron correlation, Self -consistent field wave 
function, Moller-Plesset theory, Coupled cluster formulation (10 lectures)  
Basics of Molecular Dynamics: Theoretical foundation, Boltzmann‟s relation, harmonic oscillator and 
harmonic baths, Algorithms for equations of motions (7 lectures)      
 
Textbook 
1. Levine, I. N., (2000) Quantum Chemistry, Pearson education. 
2. Lowe, J. P., (1995) Elementary Quantum Chemistry, Academic Press. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Szabo, A. and Ostlund, N. S., (1996) Modern Quantum Chemistry, Dover. 
2. D. Frenkel and B. Smith, (2002), Understanding Molecular Dynamics Simulations,1st Edition, 
Academic Press  
 
Self learning Material 
1. K. Mangala Sunder, Introduction to Chemistry & Quantum Chemical Methods, NPTEL course 
material, Department of Chemistry, IIT Madras, http://nptel.iitm.ac.in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
119 
 
 
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur 
 
Course Booklet  
 
for 
M.Tech. (AI)  
and  
Dual degree M.Tech. (AI) + PhD  
 
Programs  
 
offered by the 
 
Department of Computer Science and 
Engineering 
 
 
July 2019 
 
120 
 
M.Tech in Artificial Intelligence (AI) 
Introduction: 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is a branch of computer science that aims to create machines to act with 
higher levels of intelligence and emulate the human capabilities of sense, comprehend and act. The 
core problems of artificial intelligence include programming computers for certain traits such as 
Knowledge, Reasoning, Problem-solving, Perception, Learning and Planning. AI technology 
development and applications are evolving rapidly with major implications for economies and 
societies. As the demand for such applications increases, there is also an increasing need for 
building the future workforce for AI. For developing the AI ecosystem, this program will be 
executed in synergy with other M.Tech programs running in IIT Jodhpur, such as Sensors & IoT, 
Cyber-Physical Systems, and Advanced Manufacturing and Design. 
Objectives: 
This M.Tech in AI programme will offer students with deep knowledge of both fundamental AI 
technologies, as well as application-oriented AI. A student completing this program will be capable 
to undertake careers in industry as well as academia. He/She will have the option to explore a 
variety of domains including Manufacturing, Fintech, Healthcare, Agriculture/Food Processing, 
Education, Retail/Customer Engagement, Human and Robot interaction/intelligent automation, 
Smart City , Aid for Differently Abled/Accessibility Technology. 
Expected Graduate Attributes: 
After completing this programme, a student will be able to develop an ability to: 
1. Comprehend fundamental concepts and hands-on knowledge of the state-of-the-art AI 
methodologies.  
2. Design and Build real-world AI systems for complex planning, decision making and learning, 
solving application-specific problems, and to reason about them. 
3. Conceive, Design and Develop Intelligent multi-modal multi-sensory Man-Machine 
interfaces.  
4. Design, Develop and Deploy machine learning based applications using structured and 
unstructured data (e.g., speech, text, images/videos). 
5. Understand and Assess reliability, dependability and trust-worthiness of AI-based systems. 
6. Design and develop AI applications for resource constrained environments.  
7. Adhere to evolving ethics and privacy laws across various domains and territories.  
8. Plan and manage technical projects.  
Learning Outcome: 
1. Understand the fundamentals of Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning, Inference Engines, 
Speech, Vision, Natural Language Understanding, Robotics, and Human Computer 
Interaction. 
2. Unify the knowledge of human cognition, AI, Machine Learning and data engineering for  
designing systems.  
3. Demonstrate hands-on knowledge of state-of-the-art AI tools for real-world problem-
solving. 
4. Ability to develop real-time and robust AI-based systems with specific software, hardware 
and data requirements.  
5. Build solutions to explore fully immersive computer-generated worlds (in VR), and overlay 
computer graphics onto our view of our immediate environment (AR) along with smart, 
cognitive functionality. 
6. Demonstrate advanced skills to comprehend and communicate effectively.  
7. Carry out projects using intelligent cognitive solutions provided by AI algorithms to get 
more insights in stakeholder management, risk modeling, intelligent resource scheduling 
and managing project constraints with intelligent use of data models. 
121 
 
Course Structure for  
M.Tech. (AI) Program and Dual degree M.Tech. (AI) + PhD 
 
Cat Code Course Title L-T-
P 
Cr  Cat Code Course Title L-T-
P 
Cr 
I Semester  II Semester 
MC MAL7xx0 Statistics I  
Matrix Computation  
Optimization 
1-0-
0 
1-0-
0 
1-0-
0 
3  MC CSL8xx0 Artificial Intelligence II 3-0-
0 
3 
MC CSL7xx0 Artificial Intelligence I 3-0-
0 
3  MC CSL8xx0 Machine Learning II 3-0-
0 
3 
MC CSL7xx0 Machine Learning I 3-0-
0 
3  MC CSL8xx0 Real Time Autonomous 
Systems 
2-0-
0 
2 
MC CSP7xx0 Data Structures and 
Practices 
0-0-
2 
1  ME xxxxx Program Elective 3 3-0-
0 
3 
ME xxxxx Program Elective 1 3-0-
0 
3  MO xxxxx Open Elective 1 3-0-
0 
3 
ME xxxxx Program Elective 2 3-0-
0 
3  NG xxxxx Innovation and IP 
Management  
1-0-
0 
1 
 xxxxx Technical 
Communication 
1-0-
0 
1       
Total Credits: 17  Total Credits: 15 
 
*Maths Fractals: Linear Algebra, Probability and Random Processes, Optimization 
 
Cat Code Course Title L-T-P Cr  Cat Code Course Title L-T-P Cr 
III Semester  IV Semester 
MP CSDxx
0 
Major Project – Part 1 0-0-
10 
5  MP CSDxx
0 
Major Project – Part 2 0-0-
22 
1
1 
ME xxxxx Program Elective 4 3-0-0 3  ME xxxxx Program Elective 6 3-0-0 3 
ME xxxxx Program Elective 5 3-0-0 3  NG xxxxx Professional Ethics 1-0-0 1 
MO xxxxx Open Elective - 2 3-0-0 3       
NG xxxxx System Engineering 
and Project 
Management 
1-0-0 1       
Total Credits: 15  Total Credits: 15 
 
Credit Distribution 
1 Program Core 18 credits 
2 Program Electives 18 credits 
3 Open Electives 6 credits 
4 Project 16 credits 
5 Non-graded  4 credits 
Total 62 credits 
 
  
122 
 
Program Electives for M.Tech. (AI) and  
Dual Degree M.Tech. (AI)+Ph.D. Program 
 
Courses offered by Department of Computer Science and Engineering 
 Advanced Computer Graphics 
 Algorithms for Big Data 
 AI for Finance 
 Bio-image computing 
 Blockchain 
 Computer Graphics 
 Computer Vision 
 Computational Optimization 
 Computer Architecture 
 Data Visualization 
 Dependable AI 
 Digital Image Analysis 
 Edge and Fog Computing 
 Embedded Systems 
 GPU Programming 
 Graph Theory and Applications 
 Human Machine Interface 
 Information Retrieval and Web Mining 
 Introduction to Augmented Reality and Virtual Reality 
 Machine Learning with Big Data 
 Natural Language Processing 
 Neuromorphic Computing and Design 
 Ad hoc Wireless Networks 
 Selected Topics in Artificial Intelligence - I 
 Selected Topics in Artificial Intelligence - II 
 Selected Topics in Artificial Intelligence - III 
 Selected Topics in Computer Science - I 
 Selected Topics in Computer Science - II 
 Selected Topics in Computer Science - III 
 Social Network Analysis 
 Software and Data Engineering 
 Security and its Applications 
 Speech processing 
 Stream Analytics 
 Vehicular Ad-hoc Networks (VANETs) 
 
Courses offered by Department of Electrical Engineering 
 Adaptive Signal Processing 
 Advanced Control System 
 Advanced Digital Communication 
 Advanced Signal Processing 
 Analog and Interfacing Circuits 
 Antenna Engineering 
 Applied Optimization for Wireless Communication 
 Backhaul Networks for Wireless Systems 
 Coding Theory 
 Compressive Sensing  
 Computational Imaging 
 Cyber Physical System Modelling Laboratory 
123 
 
 Data Compression 
 Digital image and Video Processing Lab 
 Digital Image Processing and Applications 
 Digital Signal Processing 
 Digital Video Processing 
 Digital VLSI  Design 
 Embedded System Design 
 Embedded System Design Lab 
 Flexible and Printed Electronics 
 Free Space Optical Communications 
 GNSS Signal Processing 
 Image Sensor Design and Applications 
 Introduction to Cyber-Physical Systems 
 Machine Learning for Communication 
 Mathematical Modelling and Simulation 
 Microfluidics Technology 
 Microsystems Fabrication Technology 
 Millimeter Wave Technology 
 Multi-rate Digital Signal Processing 
 Nanosensors 
 Network Information Theory 
 Neuromorphic computing and design 
 Optical Fiber Communications 
 Optimal Filtering 
 Physical Layer Security 
 Principles of Data and System Security 
 Real Time Communications 
 Resource Constrained AI 
 RF IC Design 
 RF IC Design Lab 
 Selected Topics in Communication I  
 Selected Topics in Communication I  
 Selected Topics in Communication II 
 Selected Topics in Communication III 
 Selected Topics in Sensors & IoT I 
 Selected Topics in Sensors & IoT II 
 Selected Topics in Sensors & IoT III 
 Selected Topics in Signal Processing I  
 Selected Topics in Signal Processing II 
 Selected Topics in Signal Processing III 
 Sensors and IoT Lab 
 Sensors and Measurement 
 Smart Grid 
 Speech and Audio Signal Processing 
 Statistical Decision Theory 
 Systems-on-Chips Design 
 VLSI Design Lab 
 Wavelets 
 Wireless Communication 
 Wireless Networks 
 
Courses offered by Department of Mechanical Engineering 
 Robotics 
 
124 
 
Courses offered by Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering 
 Bioinformatics 
 Computational Biology 
 
Courses offered by Department of Mathematics 
 Financial Engineering 
 Computational finance 
 Computational Game Theory 
 Advanced topics in computational PDE 
 Dynamical Systems 
 Stochastic Processes 
 Representation of Finite Groups 
 
Courses offered by Department of Physics 
 Quantum Computing 
 Quantum Information Processing 
 Quantum Cryptography and Coding 
 
Courses offered by IDRP Digital Humanities 
 Digital Humanities 
  
125 
 
 
  
Title Data structures and practices Number CSP7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 0–0–2 [1] 
Offered for M.Tech. Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Computer Programming   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Explain various data structures and provide details to implement and use them in 
different algorithms 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Write, debug and rectify the programs using different data structures  
2.  Expertise in transforming coding skills into algorithm design and implementation 
Contents  
Laboratory Experiments  
Exercises based on 
Abstract Data Types : Arrays, link-list/list, hash tables, dictionaries, structures,  stack, 
queues  (4 labs) 
Data Structures: Heap, Sets, Sparse matrix, Binary Search Tree , B-Tree/ B+ Tree , Graph  
(4 labs) 
Algorithm implementation: Quick or Merge sort, Breadth or Depth first search or Dijkstra‟s 
Shortest Path First algorithm, Dynamic programing (6 labs) 
Textbook 
1. Weiss, M. A. (2007), Data Structures and Algorithm Analysis in C++, Addison-Wesley. 
2. Lipschutz, S. (2017), Data Structures with C, McGraw Hill Education. 
3. Cormen, T. H., Leiserson, C. E., Rivest, R. L. and Stein, C., (2009), Introduction to 
Algorithms, MIT Press. 
    Online Course Material  
1. Department of Computer Science and Engineering, IIT 
Delhi, http://www.nptelvideos.in/2012/11/data-structures-and-algorithms.html 
126 
 
 
Title Artificial Intelligence I Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. 1st Year, Ph.D. 1st Year  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives  
     The Instructor will: 
1.  Cover various paradigms that come under the broad umbrella of AI. 
 Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to:  
1.  Develop an understanding of where and how AI can be used. 
Contents  
Introduction (1 lecture)  
Propositional logic (8 lectures)  
Search: Uninformed strategies (BFS, DFS, Dijkstra), Informed strategies (A* search, heuristic  
functions, hill-climbing), Adversarial search (Minimax algorithm, Alpha-beta pruning) (10  
lectures)  
Predicate logic: Knowledge representation, Resolution (6 lectures)  
Rule-based systems: Natural language parsing, Context free grammar (3 lectures)  
Constraint satisfaction problems (4 lectures)  
Planning: State space search, Planning Graphs, Partial order planning (4 lectures)  
Uncertain Reasoning: Probabilistic reasoning, Bayesian Networks, Dempster-Shafer theory,  
Fuzzy logic (6 lectures)  
Textbook  
1.Russel,S., and Norvig,P., (2015), Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, 3rd Edition,  
      Prentice Hall 
Reference Books  
1. Research literature  
 
 
127 
 
Self Learning Material  
1.   Department of Computer Science, University of California, Berkeley,  
      http://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLD52D2B739E4D1C5F  
2.   NPTEL: Artificial Intelligence, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106105077/  
 
 
  
128 
 
Title Artificial Intelligence II Number CSL8XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. 1st Year, Ph.D. 1st Year  Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Artificial Intelligence-1   
Objectives  
     The Instructor will: 
1.  Cover modern paradigms of AI that go beyond traditional learning.  
Learning Outcomes  
     The students are expected to have the ability to:  
1.  Develop an understanding of modern concepts in AI and where they can be used. 
2.  Design, implement and apply novel AI techniques based on emerging real-world  
     requirements. 
Contents  
CSL8XX1: Artificial Intelligence: Probabilistic Reasoning and Knowledge 
Representation 1-0-0[1] 
Probabilistic Reasoning over time: Hidden Markov Models, Kalman Filters, Dynamic  
Bayesian Networks (7 lectures)  
Knowledge Representation: Ontological engineering, Semantic Networks, Description Logics  
(7 lectures)  
CSL8XX1: Artificial Intelligence: Making Decisions 1-0-0[1] 
Making decisions: Utility theory, utility functions, decision networks, sequential  
decision problems, Partially Observable MDPs, Game Theory (14 lectures)  
CSL8XX1: Artificial Intelligence: Reinforcement Learning 1-0-0[1] 
Reinforcement Learning: Passive RL, Active RL, Generalization in RL, Policy 
Search, Deep Reinforcement Learning (14 lectures)  
Textbook  
1.  Russel,S., and Norvig,P., (2015), Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, 3rd Edition,  
      Prentice Hall 
Reference Books  
1. Yang, Q. (1997), Intelligent Planning: A decomposition and abstraction based approach, 
Springer Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg.    
 
129 
 
Title Machine Learning I Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. 1st Year, Ph.D. 1st Year Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite None    
Objectives  
     The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide motivation and understanding of the need and importance of Machine Learning 
in today‟s world  
2.  Provide details about various algorithms in Machine Learning  
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Develop a sense of Machine Learning in the modern context, and independently work   
on problems relating to Machine Learning  
2. Design and program efficient algorithms related to Machine Learning, train models,  
conduct experiments, and deliver ML-based applications  
Contents 
CSL7XX1: Machine Learning I: Supervised Learning 1-0-0[1] 
Introduction: Motivation, Different types of learning, Linear regression, Logistic regression (2 
lectures)  
Gradient Descent:  Introduction, Stochastic Gradient Descent, Subgradients, Stochastic 
Gradient Descent for risk minimization (2 lectures)  
Support Vector Machines : Hard SVM, Soft SVM, Optimality conditions, Duality, Kernel trick, 
Implementing Soft SVM with Kernels (4 lectures)  
Decision Trees: Decision Tree algorithms, Random forests (2 lectures)  
Neural Networks: Feedforward neural networks, Expressive power of ne ural networks, SGD 
and Backpropagation (3 lectures)  
Model selection and validation: Validation for model selection, k-fold cross-validation, Training-
Validation-Testing split, Regularized loss minimization (1 lectures)  
CSL7XX2: Machine Learning I: Unsupe rvised Learning and Generative Models 1 -0-
0[1] 
Nearest Neighbour: k-nearest neighbour, Curse of dimensionality (1 lecture)  
Clustering: Linkage-based clustering algorithms, k -means algorithm, Spectral clustering (3 
lectures)  
Dimensionality reduction:  Principal Component Analysis, Random projections, Compressed 
sensing (2 lectures)  
Generative Models: Maximum likelihood estimator, Naive Bayes, Linear Discriminant Analysis, 
130 
 
Latent variables and Expectation-maximization algorithm, Bayesian learning (5 lectures)  
Feature Selection and Generation: Feature selection, Feature transformations, Feature learning 
(3 lectures)  
CSL7XX3: Machine Learning I: Computational Learning Theory and Deep Neural 
Networks 1-0-0[1] 
Statistical Learning Framework: PAC learning, Agnostic PAC learning, Bias -complexity tradeoff, 
No free lunch theorem, VC dimension, Structural risk minimization, Adaboost (7 lectures)  
Foundations of Deep Learning: DNN, CNN, RNN, Autoencoders (7 lectures)  
Textbook 
1. Shalev -Shwartz,S., Ben -David,S., (2014), Understanding Machine Learning: From 
Theory to Algorithms, Cambridge University Press  
Reference Books  
1. Mitchell Tom (1997). Machine Learning, Tata McGraw-Hill  
Self Learning Material  
1.   Department of Computer Science, Stanford University,  
      https://see.stanford.edu/Course/CS229  
  
131 
 
Title Machine Learning II Number CSL8XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. 1st Year, Ph.D. 1st Year Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Machine Learning-1   
 
Objectives  
     The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide technical details about various recent algorithms and software platforms related 
to Machine Learning with specific focus on Deep Learning.  
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.   Design and program efficient algorithms related to recent machine learning techniques,  
      train models, conduct experiments, and develop real-world ML-based applications and 
      products   
Contents  
CSL7XX1: Machine Learning II: Introduction to Deep Learning 1-0-0[1] 
Model Search: Optimization, Regularization, AutoML (4 lectures)  
Deep Networks: Attention layers, Gated CNNs, Graph Neural Networks (8 lectures)  
Applications: Neural language models (2 lectures)  
CSL7XX2: Machine Learning II: Representation Learning & Structured Models 1 -0-
0[1] 
Representation Learning: Unsupervised pre-training, transfer learning and domain adaptation, 
distributed representation, discovering underlying causes (7 lectures)  
Structured models:  learning about depe ndencies, inference and approximate inference, 
sampling and Monte Carlo Methods, Importance Sampling, Gibbs Sampling, Partition Function, 
MAP inference and Sparse Coding, Variational Inference (7 lectures)  
CSL7XX3: Machine Learning II: Deep Generative Models 1-0-0[1] 
Deep Generative Models: Deep Belief Networks, Variational Autoencoder, Generative 
Adversarial Network (GAN), Deep Convolutional GAN, Autoencoder GANs, iGAN, pix2pix, 
CycleGAN, Conditional GANs, StackGAN (14 lectures)  
Laboratory Experiments  
Overview of Deep Learning platforms such Tensorflow and PyTorch.  
Textbook 
1.Goodfellow,I., Bengio.,Y., and Courville,A., (2016), Deep Learning, The MIT Press  
132 
 
Reference Books  
1. Charniak, E. (2019), Introduction to deep learning, The MIT Press.  
Self Learning Material  
1.   https://www.deeplearningbook.org/  
 
  
133 
 
Title Real Time Autonomous Systems Number CSL8XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 
Offered for  Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Machine Learning I, Artificial Intelligence I   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide an understanding about autonomous/ semi autonomous systems like autonomous 
cars and drones.  
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand and use the methodologies to design, model and implementation of 
autonomous systems for real time applications.  
         
Contents 
Introduction to Agents, Agent Architectu res: Subsumption Architecture, Situated Automata, 
Hybrid Architecture (4) 
Real time System Implementation (3) 
Mobile agents – locomotion (wheeled, legged, aerial), sensors and mechanisms. (3) 
Robot localisation & SLAM (4) 
Planning and Navigation (6) 
Case Study: Autonomous car – learning to drive; human centered autonomous vehicle. (8) 
Laboratory Experiments  
Textbook  
1. Seigwart, R. and Nourbakhsh, I.R. Introduction to Autonomous Mobile Robots , 2nd edition, 
MIT Press 2011 
2. Giorgio C. Buttazzo, Hard Real-Time Computing Systems: Predictable Scheduling Algorithms  
and Applications,” Springer US, Year: 2011 
3. Stuart J. Russell and Peter Norwig, Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach , 3rd edition, 
Pearson Press 
4. Markus Maurer et al. eds. Autonomous Driving, Springer Link (open access) 
5. Gerhard Weiss ed., Multiagent System, Second Edition, MIT Press, 2013 
Reference Books  
1. Tzafestas, S. G. (Ed.). (2012). Advances in intelligent autonomous systems (Vol. 18). 
Springer Science & Business Media. 
2. Ge, S. S. (2006). Autonomous mobile robots: sensing, control, decision making and 
134 
 
applications. CRC press. 
1. 3. Mhamed Itmi, Alain Cardon(2016),  New Autonomous Systems,  Wiley-ISTE. 
2.  
3. 4. De Gyurky, S. M., & Tarbell, M. A. (2013). The Autonomous System: A Foundational 
Synthesis of the Sciences of the Mind. John Wiley & Sons. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
135 
 
 
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur 
Course Booklet  
 
for 
 
M.Tech. (CSE)  
 
and  
 
Dual degree M.Tech. (CSE) + PhD  
 
Programs  
offered by the 
 
Department of Computer Science and 
Engineering 
 
 
July 2019 
 
136 
 
M.Tech and M.Tech-Ph.D dual degree programs 
in Computer Science and Engineering 
Introduction: 
Traditionally Computer Science and Engineering (CSE) teaching were focusing on two major areas, 
i.e., theories and systems (database, computer hardware, and operating systems). With the advent 
of the era of Cloud Computing, Edge Computing, AI and Big Data, the discipline is being 
transformed by incorporation of new emerging technologies. It is becoming an instrumental tool in 
solving major proble ms faced by modern society such as energy, natural disasters, pollution, and 
water. Through this newly revamped M.Tech and M.Tech -Ph.D dual degree programs in CSE, IIT 
Jodhpur is making a conscious effort to divulge from the traditional path and planning t o reposition 
itself to become a leading institute in this new genre of Computer Science education. 
Objectives: 
This M.Tech and M.Tech-Ph.D dual degree programs in CSE will offer students with deep knowledge 
of core and applied computer science. Through thi s programme, a student will learn niche subject 
areas which are of paramount importance in the modern big data era, such as Computer Systems 
and Security. This programme is aiming at imparting the necessary breadth and depth to the 
students for pursuing ca reers in academics as well as in industry. This programme is aiming at 
extending undergraduate computing skills with up -to-date and in -depth expertise in specialized 
areas of Computer Systems and Security. 
Expected Graduate Attributes: 
After completing this programme, a student will be able to develop an ability to: 
1. Understand fundamental concepts and hands -on knowledge of emerging fields in Computer 
Science.  
2. Conceive, Design and Develop state-of-the-art scalable parallel and distributed systems 
3. Solve Big data problems through the knowledge of advanced data structures, distributed 
algorithmic design, analysis, and applications.  
4. Design and develop network protocols for Wireless, Sensor, Mobile, and Vehicular networks.  
5. Ideate, Implement and Integrate cryptographic, fault tolerant algorithms for large scale 
distributed systems  
6. Understand state -of-the-art hardware platforms for running compute intensive distributed 
algorithms 
7. Ability to understand and apply evolving ethics and privacy laws across various domains and 
territories. 
8. Plan and manage technical projects 
Learning Outcome: 
1. Understand the fundamentals of algorithmic complexity, advanced computer architecture, 
advanced network, and security protocols. 
2. Apply appropria te design principles, framework and protocols to develop dependable 
systems. 
3. Demonstrate hands -on knowledge of cutting edge simulation, synthesizing, programming 
tools. 
4. Ability to design and develop system architecture for mobile, cloud, fog, and edge 
computing.  
5. Demonstrate hands -on knowledge of virtualization, data center design and management, 
and software defined networking. 
6. Skills to comprehend and communicate effectively.  
7. Apply appropriate project and business management principles and tools for real -world 
problems.  
137 
 
Course Structure for the  
M.Tech. (CSE) Program and  
Dual Degree M.Tech. (CSE)+Ph.D. Program 
 
 
Cat Code Course Title L-T-P Cr  Cat Code Course Title L-T-P Cr 
I Semester  II Semester 
MC MAL7xx0 Statistics I  
Matrix Computation  
Optimization 
1-0-0 
1-0-0 
1-0-0 
3  MC CSL7xx0 Computer Architecture 3-0-0 3 
MC CSL7xx0 Algorithms for Big 
Data 
2-0-0 2  MC CSL7xx0 Software and Data 
Engineering 
3-0-0 3 
MC CSL7xx0 Machine Learning I 3-0-0 3  MC CSL7xx0 Security and its applications 3-0-0 3 
MC CSP7xx0 Data Structures and 
Practices 
0-0-2 1  ME xxxxx Program Elective 3 3-0-0 3 
ME xxxxx Program Elective 1 3-0-0 3  MO xxxxx Open Elective 1 3-0-0 3 
ME xxxxx Program Elective 2 3-0-0 3  NG xxxxx Innovation and  IP 
Management 
1-0-0 1 
NG xxxxx Technical 
Communication 
1-0-0 1       
Total Credits: 16  Total Credits: 16 
*Maths Fractals: Linear Algebra, Probability and Random Processes, Optimization 
 
Cat Code Course Title L-T-P Cr  Cat Code Course Title L-T-P Cr 
III Semester  IV Semester 
MP CSD7xx
0 
Major Project – Part 1 0-0-10 5  MP CSD8x
x0 
Major Project – Part 2 0-0-22 11 
ME xxxxx Program Elective 4 3-0-0 3  ME xxxxx Program Elective 6 3-0-0 3 
ME xxxxx Program Elective 5 3-0-0 3  NG xxxxx Professional Ethics 1-0-0 1 
MO xxxxx Open Elective - 2 3-0-0 3       
NG xxxxx System Engineering  
and Project 
Management 
1-0-0 1       
Total Credits: 15  Total Credits: 15 
 
Credit Distribution 
1 Program Core 18 credits 
2 Program Electives 18 credits 
3 Open Electives 6 credits 
4 Project 16 credits 
5 Non-graded  4 credits 
Total 62 credits 
 
  
138 
 
 
Program Electives for M.Tech. (CSE) and  
Dual Degree M.Tech. (CSE)+Ph.D. Program 
 
Courses offered by Department of Computer Science and Engineering 
 Advanced Computer Graphics 
 AI for Finance 
 Artificial Intelligence I 
 Artificial Intelligence II 
 Bio-image computing 
 Blockchain 
 Computer Graphics 
 Computer Vision 
 Computational Optimization 
 Data Visualization 
 Dependable AI 
 Digital Image Analysis 
 Edge and Fog Computing 
 Embedded Systems 
 GPU Programming 
 Graph Theory and Applications 
 Human Machine Interface 
 Information Retrieval and Web Mining 
 Introduction to Augmented Reality and Virtual Reality 
 Machine Learning II 
 Machine Learning with Big Data 
 Natural Language Processing 
 Neuromorphic Computing and Design 
 Real time Autonomous Systems 
 Ad hoc Wireless Networks 
 Selected Topics in Artificial Intelligence - I 
 Selected Topics in Artificial Intelligence - II 
 Selected Topics in Artificial Intelligence - III 
 Selected Topics in Computer Science - I 
 Selected Topics in Computer Science - II 
 Selected Topics in Computer Science - III 
 Social Network Analysis 
 Speech processing 
 Stream Analytics 
 Vehicular Ad-hoc Networks (VANETs) 
 
Courses offered by Department of Electrical Engineering 
 Adaptive Signal Processing 
 Advanced Control System 
 Advanced Digital Communication 
139 
 
 Advanced Signal Processing 
 Analog and Interfacing Circuits 
 Antenna Engineering 
 Applied Optimization for Wireless Communication 
 Backhaul Networks for Wireless Systems 
 Coding Theory 
 Compressive Sensing  
 Computational Imaging 
 Cyber Physical System Modelling Laboratory 
 Data Compression 
 Digital image and Video Processing Lab 
 Digital Image Processing and Applications 
 Digital Signal Processing 
 Digital Video Processing 
 Digital VLSI  Design 
 Embedded System Design 
 Embedded System Design Lab 
 Flexible and Printed Electronics 
 Free Space Optical Communications 
 GNSS Signal Processing 
 Image Sensor Design and Applications 
 Introduction to Cyber-Physical Systems 
 Machine Learning for Communication 
 Mathematical Modelling and Simulation 
 Microfluidics Technology 
 Microsystems Fabrication Technology 
 Millimeter Wave Technology 
 Multi-rate Digital Signal Processing 
 Nanosensors 
 Network Information Theory 
 Neuromorphic computing and design 
 Optical Fiber Communications 
 Optimal Filtering 
 Physical Layer Security 
 Principles of Data and System Security 
 Real Time Communications 
 Resource Constrained AI 
 RF IC Design 
 RF IC Design Lab 
 Selected Topics in Communication I  
 Selected Topics in Communication I  
 Selected Topics in Communication II 
 Selected Topics in Communication III 
 Selected Topics in Sensors & IoT I 
 Selected Topics in Sensors & IoT II 
 Selected Topics in Sensors & IoT III 
 Selected Topics in Signal Processing I  
 Selected Topics in Signal Processing II 
 Selected Topics in Signal Processing III 
 Sensors and IoT Lab 
140 
 
 Sensors and Measurement 
 Smart Grid 
 Speech and Audio Signal Processing 
 Statistical Decision Theory 
 Systems-on-Chips Design 
 VLSI Design Lab 
 Wavelets 
 Wireless Communication 
 Wireless Networks 
 
Courses offered by Department of Mechanical Engineering 
 Robotics 
 
Courses offered by Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering 
 Bioinformatics 
 Computational Biology 
 
Courses offered by Department of Mathematics 
 Financial Engineering 
 Computational finance 
 Computational Game Theory 
 Advanced topics in computational PDE 
 Dynamical Systems 
 Stochastic Processes 
 Representation of Finite Groups 
 
Courses offered by Department of Physics 
 Quantum Computing 
 Quantum Information Processing 
 Quantum Cryptography and Coding 
 
Courses offered by IDRP Digital Humanities 
 Digital Humanities 
  
141 
 
 
 
  
Title Algorithms for Big Data Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 
Offered for M.Tech. 1st Year, Ph.D. 1st Year  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite None   
Objectives  
     The Instructor will:  
1.  Introduce some algorithmic techniques developed for handling large amounts of data.  
2.  Emphasize on both theoretical as well as practical aspects of such algorithms.  
Learning Outcomes  
     The students are expected to have the ability to:  
1.  Analyze existing algorithms as well as design novel algorithms pertaining to big data.  
Contents  
Sketching and Streaming: Extremely small-space data structures (4 lectures)  
Numerical linear algebra:  Algorithms for big matrices, Reg ression, Low -rank approximation, 
Matrix completion (8 lectures)  
Compressed Sensing: Sparse signals, Linear measurements, Signal recovery (8 lectures)  
External memory and cache -obliviousness: Minimizing I/O for large datasets, Algorithms and 
data structures such as B-trees, Buffer trees, Multiway mergesort (8 lectures)  
Reference Books  
Markovsky I, (2014), Low Rank Approximation: Algorithms, Implementation, Applications, 
Springer 
Eldar Y C., Kutyniok G. (2012), Compressed Sensing: Theory and Applications , Cambridge 
University Press.  
Self Learning Material  
1.   Department of Computer Science, Harvard University, Algorithms for Big Data  
142 
 
 
  
Title Data structures and practices Number CSP7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 0–0–2 [1] 
Offered for M.Tech. (CSE) 1st Year Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Computer Programming   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Explain various data structures and provide details to implement and use them in 
different algorithms 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Write, debug and rectify the programs using different data structures  
2. Expertise in transforming coding skills into algorithm design and implementation 
Contents  
Laboratory Experiments  
Exercises based on 
Abstract Data Types: Arrays, link-list/list, hash tables, dictionaries, structures,  stack, queues  
(4 labs) 
Data Structures: Heap, Sets, Sparse matrix, Binary Search Tree, B-Tree/ B+ Tree, Graph  (4 
labs) 
Algorithm implementation: Quick or Merge sort, Breadth or Depth first search or Dijkstra‟s 
Shortest Path First algorithm, Dynamic programing (6 labs) 
Textbook 
1.  Weiss, M. A. (2007), Data Structures and Algorithm Analysis in C++, Addison-Wesley. 
2. Lipschutz, S. (2017), Data Structures with C, McGraw Hill Education. 
3.   Cormen, T. H., Leiserson, C. E., Rivest, R. L. and Stein, C., (2009), Introduction to 
Algorithms, MIT Press 
Online Course Material  
1. Department of Computer Science and Engineering, IIT 
Delhi, http://www.nptelvideos.in/2012/11/data-structures-and-algorithms.html 
143 
 
Title Software and Data Engineering Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.  Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Discuss techniques to manage a large amount of data 
2.  Provide mechanisms to design and develop data-intensive computing systems 
Learning Outcomes  
     The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Design complex end-to-end data pipeline for data processing 
2.  Critically identify and use the tools for data handling and management 
3.  Use modern software technologies to design and develop data analytical systems 
Contents 
CSL7XX0 Cloud Computing and Virtualization 1-0-0 [1] 
Basics of complex software design:  Concept of modular software, microservices, 
communication, 4+1 architectural views and patterns (5 lectures) 
Cloud Computing: Architecture of cluster computing, design of data centers, open data center 
platforms, fault-tolerant system design (5 lectures) 
Virtualization: Type-1 and Type -2 virtualization, virtual machine, containers, dockers (4 
lectures)  
CSL7XX0 Data Management 1-0-0 [1] 
Data Management:  Structured data, relational database management, unstructured data, 
semi-structured data,  Nosql databas e management (mongodb), column database, graph 
database, XML, JSON, HDFS, Handling drift in data, sensor data reliability at software and 
algorithmic level, sensor data analysis techniques (14 lectures)  
CSL7XX0 Data Intensive Processing Systems 1-0-0 [1] 
Data Intensive Processing Systems:  Architecture of large scale data processing systems, 
Hadoop, Apache Spark, Storm, parallel data processing concepts such as map -reduce, directed 
acyclic graph, resilient distributed datasets, dynamic resource allocation, partial & shared 
computation, storage architecture  (14 lectures) 
Textbook  
1.  Bass L., Clements P., Kazman R., (2012), Software Architecture in Practice , 3rd edition, 
Addison-Wesley Professional 
2.  Martin K., (2017), Designing Data-Intensive Applications: The Big Ideas Behind Reliable, 
Scalable, and Maintainable Systems, 1st Edition, O'Reilly Media 
144 
 
Self Learning Material  
1.  Tylor,R.N., Medvidovic,N. and Dashofy,E.M., (2014), Software Architecture Foundation: 
Theory and Practice, Wiley  
Preparatory Course Material 
1. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 
2. International Conference on Data Engineering  
 
  
145 
 
Title Computer Architecture Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. 2nd Year Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Computer Organization   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide background to understand various components of a modern computer system,  
     its interconnections, and performance issue 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.   Explain the working principles of various components of modern computer systems  
2.   Compare between systems using benchmark data 
3.   Write, execute and debug parallel programs on GPU 
Contents 
CSL7XX0 Multi System Architecture 1-0-0 [1] 
Introduction: Defining Computer Architecture, Flynn‟s Classification of Computers, Metrics for 
Performance Measurement. (4 lectures) 
Memory Hierarchy: Introduction, Advanced Optimizations of Cache Performance, Memory 
Technology and Optimizations, Virtual Memory and Virtual Machines, The Design of Memory 
Hierarchies, Introduction to Pin Instrumentation and Cache grind, Case Study: Intel Core i7  
(10 lectures) 
CSL7XX0 Multicore Processing 1-0-0 [1] 
Instruction-Level Parallelism: Instruction-level Parallelism: Concepts and  
Challenges, Basic Compiler Techniques for Exposing ILP, Reducing Branch Costs with  
Advanced Branch Prediction, Dynamic Scheduling, Superscalar, Limitations of ILP, Case  
Study: Dynamic Scheduling in Intel Core i7. (9 lectures) 
Multicore Processor:  Introduction, CPU Interconnections, Network on Chip (NoC), Routing 
Protocols, Quality of Service on NoC. (5 lectures) 
CSL7XX0 Fundamentals of Parallel Programming  1-0-0 [1] 
Data Level Parallelism: Introduction, Vector Architecture, SIMD Instruction Set Extensions for 
Multimedia, Graphics Processing Units, GPU Memory Hierarchy, Detecting and Enhancing 
Loop- Level Parallelism, CUDA Programming, Case Study: Nvidia Maxwell. (14 lectures)  
 
146 
 
Textbook  
1. 1. Hennessy,J.L . and Patterson,D.A., (2012), Computer Architecture: A Quantitative 
Approach, 5th Edition, Morgan Kauffmann Publishers  
2. 2. Shen,J.P. and Lipasti,M.H., (2005), Modern Processor Design: Fundamentals of Superscalar 
Processors, McGraw-Hill Publishers  
Self-Learning Material  
1.  1.  CUDA: https://developer.nvidia.com/cuda-zone 
3.  2.  OpenMP: https://www.openmp.org/ 
   
Preparatory Course Material  
1.  Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106106134/ 
 
 
  
147 
 
Title Machine Learning-1 Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. 1st Year, Ph.D. 1st Year Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite None    
Objectives  
     The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide motivation and understanding of the need and importance of Machine Learning 
in today‟s world  
2.  Provide details about various algorithms in Machine Learning  
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Develop a sense of Machine Learning in the modern context, and independently work   
on problems relating to Machine Learning  
2. Design and program efficient algorithms related to Machine Learning, train models,  
conduct experiments, and deliver ML-based applications  
Contents  
CSL7XX1: Introduction to Machine Learning: Supervised Learning 1-0-0[1] 
Introduction: Motivation, Different types of learning, Linear regression, Logistic regression (2 
lectures)  
Gradient Descent:  Introduction, Stochastic Gradient Descent, Subgradients, Stochastic 
Gradient Descent for risk minimization (2 lectures)  
Support Vector Machines:  Hard SVM, Soft SVM, Optimality conditions, Duality, Kernel trick, 
Implementing Soft SVM with Kernels (4 lectures)  
Decision Trees: Decision Tree algorithms, Random forests (2 lectures)  
Neural Networks: Feedforward neural networks, Expressive power of neural networks, SGD 
and Backpropagation (3 lectures)  
Model selection and validation: Validation for model selection, k-fold cross-validation, Training-
Validation-Testing split, Regularized loss minimization (1 lectures)  
CSL7XX2: Introduction to Machine Learning: Unsupervised Learning and Generative 
Models 1-0-0[1] 
Nearest Neighbour: k-nearest neighbour, Curse of dimensionality (1 lecture)  
Clustering: Linkage-based clustering algorithms, k -means algorithm, Spectral clustering (3 
lectures)  
Dimensionality reduction:  Principal Component Analysis, Random projections, Compressed 
sensing (2 lectures)  
Generative Models: Maximum likelihood estimator, Naive Bayes, Linear Discriminant Analysis, 
148 
 
Latent variables and Expectation-maximization algorithm, Bayesian learning (5 lectures)  
Feature Selection and Generation: Feature selection, Feature transformations, Feature learnin g 
(3 lectures)  
CSL7XX3: Introduction to Machine Learning: Computational Learning Theory and 
Deep Learning 1-0-0[1] 
Statistical Learning Framework: PAC learning, Agnostic PAC learning, Bias -complexity tradeoff, 
No free lunch theorem, VC dimension, Structural risk minimization, Adaboost (7 lectures)  
Foundations of Deep Learning: DNN, CNN, RNN, Autoencoders (7 lectures)  
Textbook 
1. Shalev -Shwartz,S., Ben-David,S., (2014), Understanding Machine Learning: From 
Theory to Algorithms, Cambridge University Press  
Reference Books  
1. Mitchell Tom (1997). Machine Learning, Tata McGraw-Hill  
Self Learning Material  
1.   Department of Computer Science, Stanford University,  
      https://see.stanford.edu/Course/CS229  
 
  
149 
 
Title Security and Its Application Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.  Type Elective   
Prerequisite Networks   
Objectives  
The Instructor will:  
1.  Provide the fundamental principles of access control models and techniques, authentication 
and secure system design 
2.  Introduce a strong understanding of different cryptographic protocols and techniques and be 
able to use them 
3.   Provide methods for authentication, access control, intrusion detection and prevention  
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to:  
1.   Understand cryptography and network security concepts and application 
2.   Identify and investigate network security threat 
3.   Analyze and design network security protocols  
Contents 
CSL7xx1 Introduction to Cryptography 1-0-0 [1] 
Shannon’s Approach to Cryptography:  Measures of security, Perfect secrecy, Definition of 
entropy, One-time pad (3 lectures) 
Symmetric Key Cryptography: The notion of a symmetric key cryptography, The Data Encryption 
Standard (DES) and differential cryptanalysis, The Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) (4 
lectures) 
Cryptographic Hash Functions:  Definition of hash functi ons and properties, Unkeyed hash 
functions, Keyed hash functions, Message Authentication Codes (MAC), The Random Oracle 
Model (ROM) (4 lectures) 
Authentication: Definition of authentication, A simple authentication protocol and possible 
attacks, Strong password protocols, BM Encrypted Key Exchange (EKE), Key Distribution Centers 
(KDC), Certification authorities and certificate revocation, KDC based authentication protocols (3 
lectures) 
 
CSL7xx2 Network Security  1-0-0 [1] 
Public Key Cryptosystems:  Fundamentals of Public -key Cryptography, Background on number 
theory, The RSA public key cryptosystem, The ElGamal public key cryptosystem and discrete 
logs Digital Signatures:  An RSA based signature scheme, The ElGamal based signature 
scheme,The Schnorr signature scheme, The Digital Signature Algorithm (DSA) (6 lectures) 
Key Distribution and Key Agreement Protocols:  Key Predistribution: Diffie -Hellman key 
Exchange, The MTI key Exchange (4 lectures) 
Network Security: TCP/IP threats, The IPSEC protocol, The SSL and TLS protocols, Firewalls and 
Virtual Private Networks (VPNs), Electronic mail security, Worms, DDoS attacks, BGB and 
security considerations (4 lectures) 
 
CSL7xx3 Cyber-physical security and Blockchain 1-0-0 [1] 
(fractal 3)  Cyber-physical security : IoT sec urity, sensor actuator network security (4 
lectures) Block Chain:  Introduction to Blockchain, Blockchain Architecture and Design, 
150 
 
Consensus (Byzantine Fault, Proof of Work, Poof of Stake,), Permissioned 
Blockchains, Components of blockchain (10 lectures) 
Laboratory Experiments  
Programming exercises using Exata and  AVISPA Tools  
Textbook  
1.Stallings, W. (2017). Cryptography and network security, 7/E. Pearson Education India  
2. Douglas R. Stinson, Maura B. Paterson (2018). Cryptography: theory and practice. 4/E 
Chapman and Hall/CRC  
Reference Books  
1.  Mao, W. (2004). Modern cryptography: theory and practice. Pearson Education India 
2. Pfleeger, C. P., & Pfleeger, S. L. (2018). Security in computing . 5/E,  Prentice Hall 
Professional Technical Reference 
3.  Goldreich, O. (2009). Foundations of cryptography: volume 2, basic applications . Cambridge 
university press 
4.   Forouzan, B. A. (2015). Cryptography & network security. 3/E, McGraw-Hill, Inc.  
Self Learning Material  
 
1.   Network and Computer Security - MIT OpenCourseWare 
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-857-network-and-
computer-security-spring-2014/ 
 
2.   Cryptography I,  Coursera, Stanford University, https://www.coursera.org/learn/crypto 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
151 
 
Course Contents for the new Elective courses  
offered by the 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering 
 
 Stream Analytics 
 Machine Learning with Big Data 
 Algorithms for Big Data 
 Computer Vision 
 Digital Image Analysis 
 Edge and Fog Computing 
 Natural Language Processing 
 GPU Programming 
 Data Visualization 
 Introduction to Augmented Reality and Virtual Reality 
 Advanced Computer Graphics 
 Embedded Systems 
 Bio-image computing 
 Neuromorphic Computing and Design 
 Dependable AI 
 Resource Constrained AI 
 Ad hoc Wireless Networks 
 Vehicular Ad-hoc Networks (VANETs) 
 Selected Topics in Computer Science - I 
 Selected Topics in Computer Science - II 
 Selected Topics in Computer Science - III 
 Selected Topics in Artificial Intelligence - I 
 Selected Topics in Artificial Intelligence - II 
 Selected Topics in Artificial Intelligence - III 
 Graph Theory and Applications 
 Social Network Analysis 
 Blockchain 
 Computational Optimization 
 
 
 
  
152 
 
Title Stream Analytics  Number CSL8XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. 3rd and 4th Year, M.Tech. 1st and 2nd Year Type Elective  
Prerequisite Machine Learning-1    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide background on some of the important models, algorithms, and applications 
related to stream data  
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.   Understand and apply the practical and algorithmic aspects related to various topics of  
      data streams  
Contents  
Introduction: Stream and mining algorithms (2 lectures)  
Clustering massive data streams:  Micro-clustering based stream mining, Clustering evolving 
data streams, Online Micro-cluster maintenance, High-dimensional projected stream clustering, 
Classification of data streams using micro -clustering, On -demand stream classification, 
Applications of micro-clustering (7 lectures)  
Classification methods in data streams: Ensemble based classification, Very fast decision trees, 
On demand classification, Online Information Network, LWClass algorithm, ANNCAD algorithm, 
ALLOP algorithm (5 lectures)  
Distributed mining of data streams:  Outlier and anomaly detection, Clustering, Frequent item -
set mining, Classification, Summarization, Mining distributed data streams in resource 
constrained environments (5 lectures)  
Change diagnosis algorithms in evolving dat a streams:  Velocity density method, Use of 
clustering for characterizing stream evolution (5 lectures)  
Multi-dimensional analysis of data streams using stream cubes:  Architecture for on -line 
analysis of data streams, Stream data cube computation, Performance study (4 lectures)  
Indexing and querying data streams (3 lectures)  
Dimensionality reduction and forecasting on streams:  Principal Component Analysis, Auto -
regressive models and recursive least squares, MUSCLE, Tracking correlations and hidden 
variables (6 lectures)  
Distributed data stream mining: Local algorithm, Bayesian network learning (5 lectures)  
Textbook  
1.Aggarwal,C.C., (2007), Data Streams: Models and Algorithms , 1 st Edition, Kluwar 
Academic Publishers  
Reference Books  
1. Research literature  
 
153 
 
Self Learning Material  
1.   http://charuaggarwal.net/streambook.pdf  
 
  
154 
 
Title Machine Learning with Big Data Number CSL8XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. 4th Year, M.Tech. 2nd Year, Ph.D. 2nd Year Type Elective  
Prerequisite Artificial Intelligence-1 and Machine Learning-1    
Objectives  
      The Instructor will:  
1.   Provide an understanding of the role of big data in the real-world scenarios  
2.   Provide technical details about various algorithms and software/hardware tools/platforms  
      related to big data  
Learning Outcomes  
      The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.   Develop an understanding of big data in the modern context, and independently work on   
      problems relating to big-data  
2.   Design and program efficient algorithms for big data from the perspective of a project  
Contents  
Introduction: What is big data, Unreasonable effectiveness of data (1 lecture)  
Streaming algorithms: Streaming Naive Bayes, Stream and sort (2 lectures)  
Platforms for learning from big data  
MapReduce, New Software Stack, Large Scale File System Organization (5) 
 
Nearest Neighbour Search , Jaccardi Similarity of Sets, Similarity of Documents, Locality 
Sensitive Hashing, The Stream Data Model (4) 
Randomized methods: Clustering, Hashing, Sketching, Scalable stochastic gradient descent (3 
lectures)  
Frequent Itemsets: The Market Basket Model, A -Priori Algorithm, Handling larger datasets in 
Main Memory, Limited-Pass Algorithms, Counting Frequent Items in a Stream (6) 
Parameter Servers: Introduction, Abstraction, Parameter Cache Synchronization, Asynchronous 
execution, Model Parallel Examples (3 lectures)  
Graph-based methods: Link Analysis 
Page Rank, Topic Sensitive Page Rank, Approaches to Page Rank iteration, Link Spam, 
Semi-supervised learning, Scalable link analysis, Models for Recommendation System s, Social 
Networks as Graphs (9 lectures)  
Large-scale Machine Learning with CPUs and GPUs (3 lectures)  
155 
 
Textbook  
1.Leskovec,J., Rajaraman,A., Ullman,J., (2014), Mining of Massive Datasets , 2 nd Edition, 
Cambridge University Press  
2. Bekkerman,R., Bilenko,M., Langford,J., (2011), Scaling Up Machine Learning, Cambridge 
University Press 
Reference Books  
1. Research literature  
Self Learning Material  
1.   Department of Machine Learning, Carnegie Mellon University,  
      Machine Learning with Large Datasets Course  
2.   Department of Computer Science, University of California, Berkeley,  
      Scalable Machine Learning  
3.   ETH Zurich, Data Mining: Machine Learning from Large Datasets  
 
  
156 
 
Title Computer Vision Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. 4 th Year, M.Tech. 1 st and 2 nd Year, Ph.D. 2 nd 
Year 
Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
      The Instructor will:  
1.   Provide insights into fundamental concepts and algorithms behind some of the remarkable  
      success of Computer Vision  
2.   Impart working expertise by means of programming assignments and a project  
Learning Outcomes  
     The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Learn and appreciate the usage and implications of various Computer Vision techniques 
in real-world scenarios  
2.   Design and implement basic applications of Computer Vision  
Contents  
Introduction: The Three R‟s - Recognition, Reconstruction, Reorganization (1 lecture)  
Perspective: Static Perspective, Transformations, Dynamic perspective (5 lectures)  
Fundamentals of Image formation and processing: Radiometry of image formation, Basic 
image processing, Biological visual processing (5 lectures)  
Recognition: Object recognition case study - identifying digits with multiple approaches, Visual 
grouping, Convolutional Neural Network (ConvNet) based approaches to visual recognition of 
objects and scenes, Deformable Parts Model (DPM), Attributes, pose and actions (8 lectures)  
Analysis: Binocular Stereopsis, Markov Random Fields in Computer Vision, Solving for stereo 
correspondence, Optical flow, Review of differential geometry (12 lectures)  
Detection and Segmentation:  Contour detection, Bottom -up segmentation, Ges talt grouping 
heuristics, Semantic segmentation - instance segmentation and pixel classification, Pose and 
keypoint estimation (5 lectures)  
Image understanding:  Scene understanding from RGBD images, 3D perception from a single 
image, Face recognition (6 lectures)  
Textbook  
1. Hartley,R. Zisserman,A., (2004), Multiple View Geometry in Computer Vision, 2nd Edition, 
Cambridge University Press  
     2. Szeliski,R., (2010), Computer Vision: Algorithms and Applications, Springer-Verlag  
        London 
Reference Books  
1. Research literature  
157 
 
Title Digital Image Analysis Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives  
      The Instructor will:  
1. Introduce the origin and formation of digital imaging. 
2. Develop the understanding of different types of image processing and analysis for different 
purposes. 
3. Show how to develop modular systems for image analysis through hands -on application 
development. 
Learning Outcomes  
     The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Enhance image in spatial and frequency domain. 
2. Implement various aspects of image segmentation, compression, and content analysis.  
Contents  
Digital Image Fundamentals:  Image modeling, Sampling and Quantization, Imaging 
Geometry,Digital Geometry,  Image Acquisition Systems,  Different types of digital images. (4) 
Bilevel Image Processing:  Basic concepts of digital distances, distance transform, medial axis 
transform, component labeling, Histogram of grey level images, Optimal thresholding. (5) 
Images Enhancement:  Point processing, enhancement in spatial domain, enhancement in 
frequency domain. (5) 
Detection of edges and lines in 2D images:  First order and second order edge operators,multi-
scale edge detection,  Canny's edge detection algorithm,  Hough transform for detecting lines 
and curves. (5) 
Color Image Processing:  Color Representation, Laws of color matching, chromaticity diagram, 
color enhancement, color image segmentation, color edge detection. (5) 
Image compression:  Lossy and lossless compression schemes, prediction based compression 
schemes, vector quantization, sub-band encoding schemes, JPEG compression standard. (6) 
Segmentation:  Segmentation of grey level images, Watershed algorithm for segmenting grey 
level image. (5) 
Morphology:  Dilation, erosion, opening, closing, hit and miss transform, thinning, extension to 
grey scale morphology. (4) 
Feature Detection:  Fourier descriptors, shape features, object matching/features(3) 
 
158 
 
Textbook  
1. Gonzalez and Woods, Digital Image Processing, Prentice-Hall. 
2. Fundamentals of Digital Image Processing by Anil K.  Jain. 
Self-Learning Material 
NPTEL: Digital Image Processing 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117105079/ 
 
  
159 
 
Title Edge & Fog Computing Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech., Ph.D  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce research, frameworks, and applications in Edge Computing to the audience  
Learning Outcomes  
     The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Understand various edge devices and their ecosystems  
2.  Develop edge-based distributed computing platforms and applications 
Contents  
CSL7XX1 Introduction to IoT 1-0-0 [1] 
(fractal 1) Introduction to IoT: Internet of things as an interdisciplinary domain, IoT as a data 
centric technology, Data, information, knowledge and wisdom (DIKW) relationship (3 lectures)  
Analytics in IoT:  Analytics as a knowledge extraction technique, Role of Statistical analysis, 
Machine learning, Deep learning and Artificial Intelligence in the emergence of Internet of 
things, IoT Semantics and Streaming data analysis  (4 lectures) 
IoT Endpoint - architecture, design, and performance:  IoT Endpoint architecture, Design and 
development of IoT endpoints (4 lectures) 
IoT Gateways:  Roles of Gateway in IoT networks– Field Gateway, state-of-the-art  solutions (3 
lectures)  
CSL7XX2 Communication in IoT 1-0-0 [1] 
(fractal 2) Communication in IoT:  Fundamentals of data communication, Network a rchitecture 
and reference models (OSI – TCP/IP), Communication technologies standards – Wired & 
Wireless data link layer standards (Bluetooth/WiFi/Zigbee/802.15.4/LoRa/Sigfox), Application 
layer protocols – HTTP, MQTT, CoAP, AMQP (11 lectures) 
Sensor Netwo rks: Algorithmic Models for Sensor Networks, Aggregation service for ad -hoc 
sensor networks, Gossip -Based Computation of Aggregate Information, Optimal aggregation 
algorithms for middleware, Efficient top-K query calculation in distributed networks (3 lectures) 
CSL7XX3 Cloud and IoT 1-0-0 [1] 
(fractal 3) Cloud and IoT (Fog & Edge):  Cloud and IoT services stack,  End to End solutions 
development and design of cloud -based IoT services, device integration, stream analytics, 
Analytics use cases:  Smart building , smart cities, wearable, smart retail and smart 
workspaces, Leveraging cloud hosted application to build monitoring and control solutions 
integrated with field devices, Integration of user devices with cloud hosted 
160 
 
applications/services to enable users to interact with gateways and end points (14 lectures) 
Textbook  
1.  Buyya R, Srirama S. N., (2019), Fog and Edge Computing: Principles and Paradigms, 1st    
     edition, Wiley  
Self Learning Material 
1.  Cao J.,, Zhang Q, Shi W., (2018), Edge Computing: A Primer, Springer 
Preparatory Course Material 
1.  Edge Computing (EDGE) Conference Series, Springer 
 
 
  
161 
 
Title Natural Language Processing Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. 2nd Year Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
     The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide background to understand various modern techniques for natural language 
processing, understanding, and synthesis  
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.   Explain various NLP algorithms 
2.   Implement NLP Systems for English Language 
Contents 
Introduction: NLP tasks in syntax, semantics, and pragmatics, Applications such as 
information extraction, question answering, and machine translation, The problem of 
ambiguity, The role of machine learning. Brief history of the field (4 lectures) 
Language Models:  The role of language models, Simple N -gram models, Estimating 
parameters and smoothing, Evaluating language models, Part of Speech Tagging (10 
lectures) 
Sentences: Basic ideas in compositional semantics, Classical Parsing (Bottom up, top down, 
Dynamic Programming: CYK parser) (7 lectures) 
Syntactic parsing:  Grammar formalisms and treebanks, Efficient parsing for context -free 
grammars (CFGs), Statistical parsing and probabilistic CFGs (PCFGs), Lexicalized PCFGs, 
Neural shift-reduce dependency parsing (7 lectures) 
Semantic Analysis:   Lexical semantics and word -sense disambiguation, Compositional 
semantics, Semantic Role Labeling and Semantic Parsing (3 lectures) 
Information Extraction: Named entity recognition and relation extraction, IE using sequence 
labeling (3 lectures) 
Machine Translation: Basic issues in MT. Statistical translation, word alignment,  
phrase-based translation, and synchronous grammars (8 lectures) 
Textbook  
1. 1.  Jura fsky,D. and Martin,J.H., (2003), Speech And Language Processing , 2nd Edition, 
Pearson Education India  
2.  
Self-Learning Material  
1. Goldberg,Y. and Hirst,G., (2017), Neural Network Methods for Natural Language 
Processing, Morgan & Claypool Publishers  
162 
 
2.  C lark,A., Fox,C. and Lappin,S., (2010), The Handbook of Computational Linguistics and 
Natural Language Processing, Wiley-Blackwell  
Preparatory Course Material  
1.  Natural Language Processing with Python, Steven Bird, Ewan Klein and Edward Loper, 
O‟Reilly, http://www.nltk.org/book/ 
2.  Natural Language Pocessing, NPTEL Lectures,  
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aeOLjFe256E&list=PLD392E2ACAEF0C689  
 
 
  
163 
 
Title GPU Programming Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. 2nd Year Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.   Provide background to understand various aspects of Graphics Processing Unit (GPU)  
2.   Introduce parallel programming using GPUs.  
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.   Explain various concepts involving GPU Programming 
2.   Implement programs of GPU 
3.   Debug and profile parallel programs. 
Contents 
Introduction: History, graphics processors, graphics processing units, GPGPUs. Clock speeds, 
CPU / GPU comparisons, heterogeneity. Accelerators, parallel programming, CUDA / OpenCL 
/ OpenACC (2 lectures) 
Hello World Computation:  Kernels, launch parameters, thread hiera rchy, warps/wavefronts, 
thread blocks/workgroups, streaming multiprocessors, 1D / 2D / 3D thread mapping, device 
properties, simple programs (8 lectures) 
Support: Debugging GPU programs. Profiling, profile tools, performance aspects (2 lectures)  
Memory: Memory hierarchy, DRAM / global, local / shared, private/local, textures, constant 
memory, Pointers, parameter passing, arrays and dynamic memory, multi -dimensional 
arrays, Memory allocation, memory copying across devices, Programs with matrices, 
performance evaluation with different memories (5 lectures) 
Synchronization: Memory consistency. Barriers (local versus global), atomics, memory 
fence, Prefix sum, reduction. Programs for concurrent data structures such as worklists, 
linked-lists, Synchronization across CPU and GPU (6 lectures) 
Functions: Device functions, host functions, kernels, functors, Using libraries (such as 
Thrust), developing libraries, (3 lectures) 
Streams: Asynchronous processing, tasks, task -dependence, Overlapped data transfers, 
default s tream, synchronization with streams, Events, event -based-synchronization - 
overlapping data transfer and kernel execution, pitfalls (6 lectures) 
Advanced topics:  Case studies, Dynamic Parallelism, Unified virtual memory, Multi -GPU 
processing, Peer access, Heterogeneous processing (8 lectures) 
164 
 
Textbook  
1. 1.  Kirk,D. and Hwu,W., (2010), Programming Massively Parallel Processors: A Hands -on 
Approach, Hwu; Morgan Kaufman  
1.  
Self-Learning Material  
1.  Cook,S., (2012), CUDA Programming: A Developer's Guide to Para llel Computing with 
GPUs, Morgan Kaufman  
Preparatory Course Material  
1. Introduction to Parallel Programming, 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=F620ommtjqk&list=PLAwxTw4SYaPnFKojVQrmyOGFCqH
Txfdv2&index=1 
 
 
  
165 
 
Title Data Visualization Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. 2nd Year Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.   Provide background to understand various aspects of Data Visualization 
2.   Discuss various principles of visualizing heterogeneous types of data  
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.   Present data with visual representations for the target audience, task, and data  
2.   Analyze, critique, and revise data visualizations  
3.   Apply appropriate design principles in the creation of presentations and visualizations  
Contents 
Visual Queries:  Process of Seeing, The Act of Perception, Design Implications, Distributed 
Cognition, Visual Search Strategies (3 lectures) 
Data and Visualization: Data Type, Coordinate Systems, Scale (2 lectures) 
Visualization Design: Amount, Distribution, Proportion, Trends, Time Series, Geospatial  (10 
lectures) 
Narratives: Telling Stories with Data, Sequencing, Visualization Rhetoric, text visualization (4 
lectures) 
Mapping and Cartography: The Cartogram, Value-by-Area Mapping (4 lectures) 
Optimal Space Usage: Aspect Ratio Selection, Geometry & Aesthetics, Wilkinson‟s Algorithm 
and its extension (6 lectures) 
Networks: Scalable, Versatile and Simple Constrained Graph Layout, Visualization of 
Adjacency, Multiple Network Analysis and Visualization, Visualizing Online Social Networks (7 
lectures) 
Animation and Color:  Trend Visualization, Transitions in Statistical Data Graphics, Graphs 
with Radial Layout, Cartoons, Color and Information, Infographics (7 lectures) 
Textbook  
1.  Tufte,E., (2001), The Visual Display of Quantitative Information , 2 nd Edition, Graphics 
Press  
2.   Tufte,E., (1990), Envisioning Information, Graphics Press  
166 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1.  Wilke,C.O., (2019), Fundamentals of Data Visualization: A Primer on Making Informative 
and Compelling Figures, O‟Reilly Media  
2.  Ware,C. and Kaufman,M., (2008), Visual thinking for design. Burlington: Morgan  
Kaufmann Publishers  
3.   Wong,D., (2011), The Wall Street Journal guide to information graphics: The dos and  
don’ts of presenting data, facts and figures, New York: W.W. Norton & Company  
Preparatory Course Material  
1.   Data Visualization Course, https://curran.github.io/dataviz-course-2018/ 
 
 
  
167 
 
Title Introduction to Augmented Reality and Virtual 
Reality 
Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.   Discusses such issues, focusing upon the human element of AR and VR 
2.   Explain the Hardware and software related issues related to AR and VR 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.   Explain perceptual concepts governing augmented reality and virtual reality 
2.   Identify and solve the issues of various augmented reality and virtual reality frameworks 
3.   Design immersive experience using AR and VR Software 
Contents 
Introduction: Definition of X -R (AR, VR, MR), modern experiences, historical perspective, 
Hardware, sensors, displays, software, virtual world generator, game engines (6 lectures)  
Geometry of Visual World:  Geometric modeling, transforming rigid bodies, yaw, pitch, rol l, 
axis-angle representation, quaternions, 3D rotation inverses and conversions, homogeneous 
transforms, transforms to displays, look -at, and eye transform, canonical view and perspective 
transform, viewport transforms (8 lectures)  
Light and Optics: Interpretation of light, reflection, optical systems (4 lectures)  
Visual Perception: Photoreceptors, Eye and Vision, Motion, Depth Perception, Frame rates and 
displays (6 lectures)  
Tracking: Orientation, Tilt, Drift, Yaw, Lighthouse approach (4 lectures)  
Head Mounted Display: Optics, Inertial Measurement Units, Orientation Tracking with IMUs, 
Panoramic Imaging and Cinematic VR, Audio (8 lectures)  
Frontiers: Touch, haptics, taste, smell, robotic interfaces, telepresence, brain -machine 
interfaces (6 lectures)  
Textbook  
1.   Shirley, M., (2016), Fundamentals of Computer Graphics, 4th Edition, CRC Press  
2.   LaValle, (2016), Virtual Reality, Cambridge University Press 
3.   Schmalstieg D, and Hollerer T. (2016). Augmented Reality: Principles & Practice , Pearson 
Education India 
168 
 
Reference Books  
1.   Jerald,J., (2015), The VR Book: Human -Centered Design for Virtual Reality , Morgan & 
Claypool  
2.   Mather,G., (2009), Foundations of Sensation and Perception, 2nd Edition, Psychology Press 
3.   Shirley,P., Ashikhmin,M. , Marschner,S. and Peters,A.K., Fundamentals of Computer 
Graphics, 3rd Edition, CRC Press  
4.   Bowman,D.A., Kruijff,E., LaViola,J.J. and Poupyrev,I., (2014), 3D User Interfaces: Theory 
and Practice, 2nd Edition, Addison Wesley Professional  
Self Learning Material  
1.   Steven M. LaValle, Video Lectures, 
https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLbMVogVj5nJSyt80VRXYC-YrAvQuUb6dh 
 
 
  
169 
 
Title Advanced Computer Graphics Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.   Discusses fundamentals of 2D and 3D object modeling and rendering 
2.   Explain the Hardware and software related issues of Computer Graphics 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.   Understand fundamentals of graphics used in various real life applications 
2.   Identify the performance characteristics of graphics algorithms 
3.   Employ algorithm to model engineering problems, when appropriate 
Contents  
Introduction: Review of 2-D, and 3D Geometry, Viewing and Clipping (5 lectures)  
Curves and Fractals: Parametric Cubic curves: B-spline, Bezier, Hermite, Surfaces, Fractals and 
its applications (9 lectures) 
Solid Modeling:  Representation of Solids, Sweep and Boundary Representation, Constructive 
Solid Geometry (8 lectures) 
Illumination and Shading: Surface detail, shadows and Transparency, Inter object Reflections 
Illumination Models, Extended Light Sources, Ray Tracing, Radiosity (6 lectures) 
Image Based Rendering:  Image synthesis, Geometry based, Plenoptic Function, Panorama, 
Lumigraph, Rendering Virtual Reality (8 lectures)  
Animation: Introduction, morphing, character animation and facial animation (3 lectures)  
Graphics Hardware:  Special-purpose computer graphics processors and accelerators (3 
lectures)  
Textbook  
1.   Shirley,M., (2016), Fundamentals of Computer Graphics, 4th Edition, CRC Press  
2.   vanD am,F. and Hughes,F., (2013), Computer Graphics: Principles and Practice , 3 rd 
Edition, Addision Wesley  
 
 
170 
 
Reference Books  
1.  Mukundan,R., (2012), Advanced Methods in Computer Graphics: With Examples in OpenGL , 
Springer  
2.    Ruben H., (2017), Computer Graphics: Principles and Practice, Larsen and Keller  
Education  
Self Learning Material  
1.   Computer Graphics, NPTEL Video Lectures, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106106090/ 
 
 
 
  
171 
 
Title Embedded Systems Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech., PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite Computer Organization and Architecture   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Explain the design of embedded systems and introduce concepts of different architectures 
and programming languages of embedded processors. 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Program and to design embedded system using embedded processors 
2.  Design Embedded AI systems 
3.  Use different IDE and debugging tools 
Contents  
Introduction: Review of Embedded Computing, embedded system design process (4 lectures) 
Architectures of embedded processors: Architecture of ARM Cortex M3, DSP and graphics 
processors, memory system mechanism, caches,  memory management units and address 
translation, interfacing (10 lectures) 
Programming and Software: models for program, data flow graphs, C and a ssembly language 
programming of ARM Cortex M3, Hardware- Software Co-design (12 lectures) 
Embedded Operating Systems : Linux, Processes and real time operating systems; Multi -rate 
system; scheduling algorithms (8 lectures) 
Embedded AI: Basics of embe dded learning  and adaptive systems , intelligent sensors, rule -
based systems, hardware accelerators for AI , heterogeneous memory system design , 
current trends and future directions (8 lectures) 
Textbook  
1. Wolf, M., (2012), Computers as Components: Principles of Embedded Computing System 
Design, 3rd Edition, Elsevier. 
2. Yiu, J., (2013), The definitive Guide to ARM Cortex M3 and M4 Processors , 3rd Edition, 
Elsevier. 
3. Alippi, C., (2014), Intelligence for Embedded Systems : A Methodological Approach , 
Springer. 
Preparatory Course Material  
1. Mazidi, M.A ., (2007), The 8051 Microcontroller and Embedded Systems: Using Assembly 
and C, 2nd Edition, Pearson Education India. 
172 
 
Title Bio-image Computing Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite Computer Programming, Basics in linear algebra, 
probability and statistics 
  
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide details of bio-signal and medical image acquisition process 
2.  Explain information extraction and image analysis techniques using machine learning with 
emphasis on the field of healthcare, agriculture and environment 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Understand different imaging modalities and acquisition process 
2.  Apply machine learning techniques for bio -signal interpretation, image representation and 
analysis 
Contents  
CSL7XX1 Bio-signal Acquisition and Representation 1-0-0 [1] 
Introduction: Overview of biological signals and biomedical imaging modalities , ECG , NMR 
spectroscopy, electron microscopy, magnetic resonance imaging , X-ray, computed 
tomography, positron emission tomograph y, ultrasound , elastography, optical imaging and 
others, Noise and error propagation in biomedical signals and image data (10 lectures) 
Visualization: Sectioning, multimodal images, overlays, rendering surfaces and volumes  (4 
lectures) 
CSL7XX1 Machine Learning for Bio-signal analysis 1-0-0 [1] 
Reconstruction: Mathematical models of image regularity, random fields, practical data 
sampling and acquisition schemes (4 lectures) 
Restoration: Deconvolution, degradation models for corrupted and missing data , Bayesian 
graphical modeling and inference, regression methods  for filtering of CT, MRI ultrasound 
and other images (4 lectures) 
Image segmentation, object delineation, classification : Clustering, graph partitioning, 
classification, mixture models, expectation maximization, variational methods using 
geometric and statistical modeling, computer aided diagnosis (4 lectures) 
Registration: Deformation models, optimization algorithms , 2D -3D registration, multi -modal 
registration (2 lectures) 
CSL7XX2 Deep Learning for Bio-imaging 1-0-0[1] 
Enhancement, Segmentation of anatomical structures, subcellular objects, cells , learning with 
little or no training data , spatial transformer network  for registration, image-based 
173 
 
phenotyping, analysis of radio-genomic data (10 lectures) 
Analysis of motion: Tracking of cells, tissues, organisms, and particles (2 lectures) 
Interactive image analysis: Human in loop, image interpretation (2 lectures) 
Laboratory Experiments  
Ultrasound image enhancement, tumor segmentation in BraTS dataset, registration of MRI 
images etc.  
Textbook  
1. Wu, G., (2016), Machine Learning and Medical Imaging, Elsevier. 
2. Epstein, C.L., (2003), Mathematics of Medical Imaging, Prentice Hall. 
3. Bankman, I., (2009), Handbook of Medical Image Processing and Analysis , 2nd Edition, 
Academic Press. 
Preparatory Course Material  
1. Bishop, C., (2006), Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, Springer. 
 
  
174 
 
Title Neuromorphic Computing and Design Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide information about neuroscientific progress towards reverse-engineering the brain 
2.  Provide essentials on key hardware building blocks, system level VLSI design and practical real-
world applications of neuromorphic Systems 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  View neuromorphic computing as a computer architecture research problem 
2.  Perform software and hardware implementation of basic biological neural circuits 
Contents 
CSL7xx1 Introduction to Neuromorphic Engineering 1-0-0 [1] 
 (fractal 1) Foundational Concepts : Introduction to neuromorphic engineering , neuroanatomy of 
human brain, signaling and operation of biological neurons, neuron  models - LIF, IF, HH, synapses 
and plasticity rules, spike-time-dependent plasticity (STDP) , biological neural circuits , non-von 
Neumann computing approach, learning rules, retina, cochlea (14 lectures) 
CSL7xx2 Neuromorphic Computing 1-0-0 [1] 
 (fractal 2) Neuromorphic Computing: Spiking Neural Networks (SNN) , Advanced Nanodevices for 
Neuron Implementation , Synaptic emulation  - non-volatile memory (NVM) , Flash, RRAM, 
memristors, CNT, Case study on Intel‟s Loihi neuromorphic chip (14 lectures) 
CSL7xx3 Neuromorphic Hardware Implementation 1-0-0 [1] 
 (fractal 3) Hardware Implementation : Electronic synapses , Digital/Analog neuromorphic VLSI , 
Hardware Imp lementation of Neuron circuits, Hardware Implementation of Synaptic and 
Learning circuits, Synaptic programming methodology optimization  (14 lectures) 
Textbook  
1. Liu, S.C., (2002), Analog VLSI: Circuits and Principles, MIT Press. 
2.  Kozma, R., (2012), Advances in Neuromorphic Memristor Science, Springer. 
3. Kandel, E., (2012), Principles of neural science, McGraw Hill. 
 
 
175 
 
Title Dependable AI Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech 4th Year and M.Tech., PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite Machine Learning, Artificial Intelligence   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide characteristic details of AI and machine learning systems to make them 
dependable, such as explainability, interpretability, safety etc.  
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Assess the dependability of AI systems. 
2.  Develop explainable, robust, and safe AI models. 
 
Contents  
Introduction: Overview, motivation, challenges – medical and surveillance (4 lectures) 
Explainable AI : Accuracy-explainablity tradeoff, interpretability problem, predictability, info-
besity, Transparency, Traceability, Environmental effects on AI systems (4 lectures) 
Methods: Causality, reasoning , layerwise relevance propagation (LRP) , attention maps, 
saliency maps, DeepLIFT, Local Interpretable Model -Agnostic Explanations (LIME)  (10 
lectures) 
Interpretable AI: Prediction consistency, Application Level Evaluation, Human Level Evaluation, 
Function level evaluation (4 lectures) 
Trustworthy AI: Integrity, Reproducibility, Accountability, Interactive AI - Human in the loop, 
Human on the loop, Human in command , Adaptability, fallback plan , Machine learning as 
service (MLaaS), General Data Protection Right (GDPR) (6 lectures) 
Safe AI : Robustness, Adversarial attacks and defenses - White-box, black -box, gray -box 
attacks, Defence mechanisms (10 lectures) 
Bias-free AI: Accessibility, Fair, data agnostics design, disentanglement (4 lectures) 
Textbook  
1.Pearl, J., (2018), The Book of Why: The New Science of Cause and Effect, Basic Books. 
Reference Book 
1. Bostrom, N., (2014), The Ethics of Artificial Intelligence . The Cambridge handbook of 
artificial intelligence, Cambridge University Press. 
 
176 
 
Preparatory Course Material  
1. Proceedings of IJCAI: Workshop on Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI). 
 
 
  
177 
 
Title Resource Constrained AI Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech 4th Year and M.Tech., PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite Machine Learning   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Explain the challenges of implementing AI and machine learning algorithms on devices with 
memory and power constraints 
2.  Provide methods to reduce computational complexity of AI techniques 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Understand the constraints of implementing AI algorithms on limited memory devices 
2.  Design and develop techniques to reduce inference time memory footprint of machine 
learning models  
Contents  
Introduction: Overview and motivation, challenges of resource constrained AI, why AI on e dge 
(4 lectures) 
Edge Computing : Edge devices and their limitations, Edge and fog computing, Distributed 
computing, communication links, communication overhead in IoT devices (8 lectures) 
Monitoring: Prediction accuracy, numeric accuracy, precision, memory footprints, 
computational complexity of AI models  (4 lectures) 
Memory Optimization of Models : KiloByte-size models,  floating -point v/s fixed -point, SeeDot 
(8 lectures) 
Edge AI : Resource-efficient kNN, SVM and deep learning models, Toeplitz matrix , Bonsai, 
ProtoNN, EMI-RNN, FastRNN, FastGRNN (10 lectures) 
 
Current Trends and Future : Hardware accelerators for Edge AI, Vision Processing Unit (VPU) , 
Streaming Hybrid Architecture Vector Engine (SHAVE) , Intel‟s Movidius Neural Compute 
Stick (NCS), Open Neural Network Exchange (ONNX), Future trends (10 lectures) 
Laboratory Experiments  
Implementation of Bonsai, CNN training using SeeDot language etc. 
Textbook  
1. Alippi, C., (2014), Intelligence for Embedded Systems : A Methodological Approach , 
Springer. 
Preparatory Course Material  
1. EdgeML by Microsoft, https://github.com/Microsoft/EdgeML/#edge-machine-learning 
2. NCSDK by Intel https://github.com/movidius/ncsdk 
178 
 
Title Ad-Hoc Wireless Networks Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P[C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. 1st Year, PhD 1st Year Type  
Prerequisite Networks   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.   Introduce the mathematical models and network protocol designs in wireless Ad-hoc  
networks 
2.   Provide a systematic exposition of network protocols and their cross‐ layer interactions 
3.  To provide more advanced in -depth networking knowledge. Upon completion of this course, 
students will be able to apply the knowledge in their networking research. A broad perspective on 
the active research areas in wireless Ad-hoc networks 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.   Demonstrate advanced knowledge of networking and wireless networking in particular  
2.   Compare different solutions for communications at each network layer 
3.   Demonstrate knowledge of protocols used in wireless communications 
Contents 
Basics of wireless networks and mobile computing: Ad hoc Networks: Introduction, Issues in Ad  
hoc wireless networks, Ad hoc wireless internet (3 lectures) 
Media access control in ad hoc and sensor networks: MAC Protocols for Ad hoc Wireless  
Networks: Introduction, Issues in designing a MAC protocol for Ad hoc Wireless Networks,  
Design goals of a MAC protocol for Ad hoc Wireless Networks, Classification of MAC protocols,  
Contention based protocols with reservation mechanisms. Contention-based MAC protocols with  
Scheduling mechanism, MAC protocols that use directional antennas, Other MAC protocols,  
Network and transport layer issues for ad hoc and sensor networks (8 lectures) 
Routing protocols for Ad hoc Wi reless Networks: Introduction, Issues in designing a routing protocol for Ad 
hoc Wireless Networks, Classification of routing protocols, Table drive routing protocol, On -demand routing 
protocol, Hybrid routing protocol, Routing protocols with effective flo oding mechanisms, Hierarchical routing 
protocols, Power aware routing protocols (8 lectures) 
Transport layer protocols:  Transport layer protocols for Ad hoc Wireless Networks: Introduction, Issues in 
designing a transport layer protocol for Ad hoc Wireless Networks, Design goals of a transport layer protocol 
for Ad hoc Wireless Networks, Classification of transport layer solutions, TCP over Ad hoc Wireless 
Networks, Other transport layer protocols for Ad hoc Wireless Networks (8 lectures) 
Security issues fo r ad hoc networks:  Security: Security in wireless Ad hoc Wireless Networks, Network 
security requirements, Issues & challenges in security provisioning, Network security attacks, Key 
179 
 
management, Secure routing in Ad hoc Wireless Networks (6 lectures) 
QoS f or ad hoc Networks:  Quality of service in Ad hoc Wireless Networks: Introduction, Issues and 
challenges in providing QoS in Ad hoc Wireless Networks, Classification of QoS solutions, MAC layer 
solutions, network layer solutions (3 lectures) 
Advanced Topics:  Software-defined network (SDN), Mesh networking, Energy issues and  
Sensor networks (6 lectures) 
Laboratory Experiments Programming exercises using NS2/NS3, QualNet, Java and 
OmNet++  
Textbook  
1.Siva Ram Murthy, C., & Manoj, B. S. (2015). Ad hoc wirele ss networks: Architectures and protocols. PHI 
Pearson Education  
2. Akyildiz, Ian F., and Xudong Wang(2015). Wireless mesh networks. Vol. 3. John Wiley & Sons  
Reference Books  
1. Basagni, S., Conti, M., Giordano, S., & Stojmenovic, I. (Eds.). (2015). Mobile ad hoc 
networking. John Wiley & Sons  
2. Perkins, C. E. (2001). Ad hoc networking (Vol. 1). Reading: Addison-wesley  
3. Toh, C. K. (2001). Ad hoc mobile wireless networks: protocols and systems. Pearson Education  
4. Cheng, X., Huang, X., & Du, D. Z. (Eds.). (2013). Ad hoc wireless networking (Vol. 14). Springer Science 
& Business Media  
Self Learning Material  
1.   1.   Computer Networks - MIT OpenCourseWare 
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-829-computer-
networks-fall-2002/lecture-notes/ 
2.  Mobile and Wireless Networks and Applications, Stanford University, 
https://web.stanford.edu/class/cs444n/ 
 
  
180 
 
Title Vehicular Ad-Hoc Networks(VANETs) Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.  Type Elective   
Prerequisite Network   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Introduce the emerging technologies, standards and applications in vehicular communication 
systems.  
2. Provide the design considerations and challenges of vehicle -to-infrastructure and vehicle -to-
vehicle communications. Theories such as vehicular mobi lity modeling, and vehicular 
technologies and standards from the physical to network layers will be introduced in the course. 
Examples of emerging applications of vehicular communications in Intelligent Transportation 
Systems will also be studied and discussed. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Understand and describe the basic theories and principles, technologies, standards, and 
system architecture of vehicular ad -hoc networks (VANET) or inter -vehicle communication 
networks.             
2.   Analyze, design, and evaluate vehicular communication platforms for various kinds of safety 
and infotainment applications.          
    
Contents 
Introduction: Basic principles and challenges, past and ongoing VANET activities (2 Lectures) 
Cooperative Vehicular Safety Applications:  Enabling technologies, cooperative system 
architecture, safety applications (2 lectures) 
Vehicular Mobility Modeling:  Random models, flow and traffic models, behavioral models, trace 
and survey based models, joint transport and communication simulations (4 lectures)  
Physical Layer Considerations for Vehicular Communications: Signal propagation, Doppler spread 
and its impact on OFDM systems (4 lectures) 
MAC Layer of Vehicular Communication Networks:  Proposed MAC approaches and standards, 
IEEE 802.11p (8 lectures) 
VANET Routing protocols : Opportunistic packet forwarding, topology -based routing, geographic 
routing (8 lectures) 
Emerging VAN ET Applications:  Limitations, example applications, communication paradigms, 
message coding and composition, data aggregation (8 lectures) 
181 
 
 
Standards and Regulations:  Regulations and Standards, DSRC Protocol Stack, Cellular V2X (6 
lectures) 
Laboratory Experiments  
Programming exercises using NS3, QualNet and Java  
Textbook  
1.Olariu, S., & Weigle, M. C. (2017). Vehicular networks: from theory to practice . Chapman 
and Hall/CRC 
2. Murthy, C. S. R. (2006). Ad hoc wireless networks: Architectures and protocols . Pearson 
Education India 
Reference Books  
1.  Emmelmann, M., Bochow, B., & Kellum, C. (Eds.). (2010). Vehicular networking: Automotive  
applications and beyond (Vol. 2). John Wiley & Sons 
2.   Claudia Campolo , Antonella Molinaro, Riccardo Scopigno(2015). Vehicular ad hoc 
Networks, Springer 
3.   Hartenstein, H., & Laberteaux, K. (2010). VANET: vehicular applications and inter -
networking technologies (Vol. 1). Chichester: Wiley 
4.   Sommer, C., & Dressler, F. (2015). Vehicular networking . Cambridge Universit y 
Press 
 
5.   Moustafa, H., & Zhang, Y. (2009). Vehicular networks: techniques, standards, and 
applications. Auerbach publications 
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Center for Autonomous Intelligent Networks and Systems (CAINS), University of California, 
Los Angeles (UCLA),http://www.cains.cs.ucla.edu/ 
 
  
182 
 
Title Selected Topics in Computer Science - I Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 
Offered for M.Tech., PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite Decided by the instructor   
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Expose the students to the latest upcoming fields in the area of computer science 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply the knowledge of recent topics to specific research areas in the field of computer 
science  
 
Contents  
The topic clouds for the course include contemporary topics in computer science and may be 
updated according to the instructor. 
 
Textbook  
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
  
183 
 
Title Selected Topics in Computer Science - II Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 
Offered for M.Tech., PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite Decided by the instructor   
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Expose the students to the latest upcoming fields in the area of computer science 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply the knowledge of recent topics to specific research areas in the field of computer 
science  
 
Contents  
The topic clouds for the course include contemporary topics in computer science and may be 
updated according to the instructor. 
 
Textbook  
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
  
184 
 
 
 
  
Title Selected Topics in Computer Science - III Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech., PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite Decided by the instructor   
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Expose the students to the latest upcoming fields in the area of computer science 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply the knowledge of recent topics to specific research areas in the field of computer 
science  
 
Contents  
The topic clouds for the course include contempo rary topics in computer science and may be 
updated according to the instructor. 
 
Textbook  
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
185 
 
Title Selected Topics in Artificial Intelligence - I Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 
Offered for M.Tech., PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite Decided by the instructor   
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Expose the students to the latest upcoming fields in the area of artificial intelligence 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply the knowledge of recent topics to specific research areas in the field of artificial 
intelligence  
 
Contents  
The topic clouds for the course include contemporary topics in artificial intelligence and may be 
updated according to the instructor. 
 
Textbook  
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
  
186 
 
Title Selected Topics in Artificial Intelligence - II Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 
Offered for M.Tech., PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite Decided by the instructor   
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Expose the students to the latest upcoming fields in the area of artificial intelligence 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply the knowledge of recent topics to specific research areas in the field of artificial 
intelligence  
 
Contents  
The topic clouds for the course include contemporary topics in artificial intelligence and may be 
updated according to the instructor. 
 
Textbook  
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
  
187 
 
Title Selected Topics in Artificial Intelligence - III Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech., PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite Decided by the instructor   
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Expose the students to the latest upcoming fields in the area of artificial intelligence 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply the knowledge of recent topics to specific research areas in the field of artificial 
intelligence  
 
Contents  
The topic clouds for the course include contemporary topics in artificial intelligence and may be 
updated according to the instructor. 
 
Textbook  
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
 
  
188 
 
Title Graph Theory and Applications  Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. 1st Year, Ph.D. 1st Year  Type Elective  
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives  
     The Instructor will: 
1.  Introduce various terminologies, concepts and algorithms related to graphs, and discuss  
     their applications in real-world scenarios.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to:  
1.   Formulate and solve real-world problems using the mathematical foundations of graph  
      theory.  
Contents  
Preliminaries: Graphs, Isomorphism, Subgraphs, Matrix representations, Degree, Operations 
on graphs, Degree sequences (3 lectures)  
Connected graphs and shortest paths: Walks, Trails, Paths, Connected graphs, Distance, Cut -
vertices, Cut -edges, Blocks, Connectivity, Weighted graphs, Shortest path algorithms (4 
lectures)  
Trees: Characterizations, Number of trees, Minimum spanning trees (3 lectures)  
Special classes of graphs: Bipartite graphs, Line graphs, Chordal graphs (2 lectures)  
Eulerian graphs: Characterization, Fleury‟s algorithm, Chinese-postman-problem (2 lectures)  
Hamilton graphs: Necessary conditions and sufficient conditions (3 lectures)  
Independent sets, coverings, matchings:  Basic equations, Matchings in bipartite graphs, 
Perfect matchings, Greedy and approximation algorithms (6 lectures)  
Vertex colorings:  Chromatic number and cliques, Greedy coloring algorithm, Coloring of 
chordal graphs, Brook‟s theorem (2 lectures)  
Edge colorings:  Gupta-Vizing theorem, Class -1 graphs and Class -2 graphs, Equitable edge -
coloring (5 lectures)  
Planar graphs:  Basic concepts, Euler‟s formula, Polyhedrons and planar graphs, 
Characterizations, Planarity testing, 5-color-theorem (3 lectures)  
Directed graphs:  Out-degree, In -degree, Connectivity, Orientation, Eulerian directed graphs, 
Hamilton directed graphs (5 lectures)  
189 
 
Applications: Biology, Social Sciences, Engineering, Computer Science (4 lectures)  
Textbook  
1.West,D.B., (2002), Introduction to Graph Theory, 2nd Edition, Prentice Hall of India  
2.Deo,N., (2003), Graph Theory: With Application to Engineering and Computer Science , 
Prentice Hall of India  
Reference Books  
1. Research literature  
Self Learning Material  
1.   NPTEL: Graph Theory (for CSE), https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106108054/39  
2.   NPTEL: Graph Theory (for Mathematics), https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111106050/  
 
 
  
190 
 
Title Social Network Analysis Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. 1st Year, Ph.D. 1st Year  Type Elective  
Prerequisite None   
 Objectives 
 The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce the social networks and the research areas therein. 
2. Provide with the mathematical foundation required for social network analysis 
3. Cover various concepts, terminologies and algorithms related to social network analysis  
4. Conduct tutorial sessions to use NetworkX library in Python for network analysis 
 
 Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the applications related to social networks 
2. Write program with social network datasets in Python 
3. Formulate real-world problems with any relational data set resembling social networks 
  
Contents 
Introduction and Different Types of Networks (1 Lecture) 
Graph Introduction: Adjacency Matrix, Paths, Connectivity, Incidence Matrix, Distance, 
Breadth-First-Search, Directed Graph (1 Lecture) 
Introduction to Python and NetworkX (1) 
Network Measures, Centrality, Core, Cliques and Clan, Strong and Weak Ties, Homophily, 
Structural Balance, Components (4 Lectures) 
Network Data Sets and Structural Analysis in Python+NetworkX+Pandas (2) 
Network Models: Random Networks, Scale Free Networks, The Barabási -Albert Model, 
Fuzzy-Granular Social Network (4 Lectures) 
Generate Synthetic Networks, Using Network Models in Python+NetworkX (2) 
Game Theory Introduction, Modeling Network Traffic using Games (3 Lectures)   
Information Cascades, Small-World Phenomenon, Epidemics (4 Lectures) 
Implementing Information Diffusion Algorithms in Python+NetworkX (2) 
Community Detection (3 Lectures) 
Implementing Community Detection Algorithms in Python+NetworkX (2) 
Link Prediction (2 Lectures) 
Implementing Link Prediction Algorithms in Python+NetworkX (2) 
Evolving Network and Temporal Networks (2 Lectures) 
191 
 
Working with Temporal Network Data (2) 
Connected Caveman Problem, Link Analysis and Web Search (2 Lectures) 
Implementing PageRank algorithm in Python+NetworkX (1) 
Network Data Science State-of-the-art (2 Lectures) 
 Textbook 
1. Networks, Crowds, and Markets: Reasoni ng About a Highly Connected World , by 
David Easley and Jon Kleinberg, (Cambridge University Press - Sep 2010) -- Pre-
publication draft available online. 
2. Network Science , by Albert -Laszlo Barabas i, (Cambridge University Press - August 
2016) -- freely available under the Creative Commons licence. 
3. Networks, by Mark Newman, (Oxford University Press, 2nd-edition - Sep 2018)  
Reference Books  
1. Complex and Adaptive Dynamical Systems, by Claudius Gros, (Springer, 4th Edition - 2015). 
 
2. The Structure of Complex Networks Theory and Applications, by Ernesto Estrada, (Oxford 
University Press - Dec 2011).  
 
3. Exploratory Social Network Analysis with Pajek, by Wouter de Nooy, Andrej Mrvar, and Vladimir 
Batagelj, (Cambridge University Press, 3rd Edition - July 2018) 
 
Self Learning Material 
1.     https://www.barabasilab.com/course 
2.  https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106106169/# 
  
  
192 
 
Title Blockchain Number CSL8XX0 
Department Computer Science and  
Engineering 
L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite Security   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Explain how blockchain technology works 
2. Integrate blockchain technology into the current business processes to make them Secure 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Understand what and why of Blockchain 
2. Explore the major components of Blockchain  and Identify a use case for a Blockchain 
application 
3. Create your own Blockchain network application 
Contents  
Introduction to Blockchain:  Digital Trust, Asset, Transactions, Distributed Ledger Technology, 
Types of network, Components of blockchain  (cryptography, ledgers, consensus, smart 
contracts) (5 lectures) 
PKI and Cryptography: Private keys, Public keys, Hashing, Digital Signature (3 lectures) 
Consensus:  Byzantine Fault, Proof of Work, Poof of Stake (4 lectures) 
Cryptocurrency: Bitcoin creation and economy, Limited Supply and Deflation, Hacks, Ethereum 
concept and Ethereum classic, Hacks Why it is so revolutionary – both (8 lectures) 
Hyperledger Fabric : Hyperledger Architecture, Membe rship, Blockchain, Transaction, 
Chaincode, Hyperledger Fabric, Features of Hyperledger, Fabric Demo (4 lectures) 
Blockchain Applications: Building on the Blockchain, Ethereum Interaction - Smart Contract and 
Token (Fungible, non -fungible), Languages, How you would go about creating your own 
blockchain, Blockchain-as-a-service (4 lectures) 
Blockchain Use Cases: Finance, Industry and Blockchain in Government (4 lectures) 
Security and Research Aspects:  Blockchain Security (DDos), Research Aspects in Blockchain, 
AI, Blockckahin and Big Data (4 lectures) 
Laboratory Experiments  
Textbook  
1. Bahga, A., & Madisetti, V. (2017). Blockchain Applications: A Hands-On Approach. VPT. 
193 
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Swan, M. (2015). Blockchain: Blueprint for a new economy. " O'Reilly Media, Inc.". 
2. Wattenhofer, Roger. The science of the blockchain. CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform, 2016. 
3. Bashir, I. (2017). Mastering blockchain. Packt Publishing Ltd. 
4. Levy, K. E. (2017). Book-smart, not street-smart: blockchain-based smart contracts and the social workings 
of law. Engaging Science, Technology, and Society, 3, 1-15.     
Preparatory Course Material  
1. MIT Online Blockchain Course, Learn Blockchain Technology, https://getsmarter.mit.edu/   
 
  
194 
 
Title Computational Optimization  Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
     The Instructor will: 
1.  Introduce various terminologies, concepts and algorithms related to classical, heuristic and  
     nature inspired optimization algorithms  
2.  Discuss their applications in real-world scenarios  
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to:  
1.   Utilize state of the art heuristic optimization algorithms in their research activities  
2.   Design and propose new and hybrid optimization algorithms  
3.   Customize heuristic optimization algorithms for special applications 
Contents  
Introduction, Definitions and Concepts: Optimization, Operational Research (OR), Engineering 
Optimization, Definition of an Optimization Problem, Feasibility Problem, Classification of 
Optimization Problems, Classification of Optimization Techniques, Heuristic Algorithms vs. 
Metaheuristics, Swar m Intelligence, Population -Based Optimization, Multi -objective 
Optimization, Parallelization, Evaluation of the Optimization Algorithms (6 lectures)  
Overview of Classical Optimization Techniques:  Linear programming, Nonlinear Programming 
(3 lectures)  
Overview of Heuristic Optimization Algorithms:  Neighborhood Search, Hill Climbing Methods, 
Greedy Algorithms, Simulated Annealing (3 lectures)  
Overview of Nature Inspired Optimization Algorithms: Evolutionary Algorithms, Tabu Search, 
Ant Colony Optimization, Particle Swarm Optimization (2 lectures)  
Simulated Annealing:  Real Annealing and Simulated Annealing, Metropolis Algorithm, 
Simulated Annealing Algorithm, Continuous Simulated Annealing, One -loop Simulated 
Annealing, Temperature Scheduling, Convergence o f Simulated Annealing, Applications, 
Normalization of the Parameters, Tuning the Parameters of an algorithm (9 lectures)  
Evolutionary Algorithms:  Methods of encoding, Operators of Evolution, Models of Evolution, 
Genetic Algorithms, Steady State Genetic Al gorithms, Genetic Programming, Memetic 
Algorithms, Differential Evolution (7 lectures)  
Tabu Search: Basic Tabu Search, Short -term Memory, Long -term Memory, Diversification and 
Intensification, Continuous Tabu Search (4 lectures)  
Ant Colony Optimization:  Collective Behavior of Social Insects, Basic ACO Algorithms, Ant 
195 
 
Algorithms for TSP, Adaptation to Continuous Problems, Applications (5 lectures)  
Particle Swarm Optimization:  Canonical PSO Algorithm, Important Parameters, Neighborhood 
Topologies (3 lectures)  
Textbook  
1.Michalewicz,Z. and Fogel,D.B., (2004), How to Solve it: Modern Heuristics , 2 nd Edition, 
Springer  
2.Simon, D., (2013), Evolutionary Optimization Algorithms, Wiley  
3.Yang,X.S., (2014), Nature-inspired Metaheuristic Algorithms, Luniver Press  
Reference Books  
1.   Rao, S.S., (2013), Engineering Optimization: Theory and Practice, 3rd Edition, New Age  
     International Publishers  
Self Learning Material  
1.   NPTEL: Traditional and Non-traditional Optimization Tools  
      https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112105235/1  
 
  
196 
 
Title Computer Graphics Number CSL7xx0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide a thorough introduction to computer graphics techniques, focusing on 2D and 3D 
modelling, image synthesis and rendering 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Explain and create interactive graphics application  
2. Implement graphics primitives 
3. Synthesize and render images for animation and visualization  
 
Contents 
CSL7xx1 Introduction to Graphical Primitives 1-0-0 [1] 
Introduction: Overview of computer graphics, representing pictures, preparing, presenting & 
interacting with pictures for presentations;   
Scan conversion: 2D Geometric Primitives ; Area Filling algorithms .  Clipping algorithms , Anti 
Aliasing 
Transformations and viewing: 2D and 3D transformations, Matrix representations & homogeneous 
coordinates, Viewing pipeline, Window to viewport co -ordinate transformation, clipping 
operations, viewport clipping, 3D viewing. 
CSL7xx2 Graphical Object Representation 1-0-0 [1] 
Curves and Surfaces: Conics, parametric and non -parametric forms; Bezier (Bernstein 
Polynomials) Curves, Cubic-Splines, B-Splines; Quadratic surfaces, Bezier surfaces and NURBS, 3 -
D modelling. 
CSL7xx3 Graphics Rendering 1-0-0 [1] 
Hidden surfaces: Depth  comparison, Z-buffer algorithm, Back face detection, BSP tree method, 
the Printer‟s algorithm, scan-line algorithm; Hidden line elimination, wire frame methods, fractal - 
geometry. 
Color & shading models: Phong's shading model, Gouraud shading, Shadows an d background, 
Color models, Photo-realistic rendering 
Animation and OpenGL primitives: Functions, pipeline, sample programs for drawing 2 -D, 3 -D 
objects; event handling and view manipulation, Introduction to GPU and animation 
 
197 
 
Textbook  
1. J. D. Foley, A. Van Dam, S. K. Feiner and J. F. Hughes, Computer Graphics; Principles and 
practice, Addison Wesley, 2nd  Edition in C,  1997. 
2. D. F. Rogers and J. A. Adams, Mathematical elements for Computer Graphics, McGraw-Hill, 
2nd Edition, 1990. 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1.  Blender: https://www.blender.org/download/ 
2. OpenGL: http://www.opengl-tutorial.org/ 
 
Preparatory Course Material  
1.Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras,  
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106106090/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
198 
 
 
 
A Proposal  
 
For 
 
 
 
M. Tech. And Dual Degree (M.Tech. and 
Ph.D.) in Cyber Physical Systems 
 
 
 
Program Structure 
 
 
 
 
  
199 
 
M.Tech. & M.Tech.-Ph.D. Dual Degree Programs in 
Cyber Physical Systems 
Introduction 
Beginning in the first decade of 21 st century and continuing today, computational and 
communication resources, tightly integrated with physical systems, shaping the new capabilities for 
the modern syst ems. The use of computational resources to achieve different capabilities is in 
existence for several decades. However, many modern systems have high degree of complexities 
and also the scale of these systems is large and/or has distributed nature. For exa mple traffic 
control system in a city requires modelling of traffic flows in different areas and optimizing different 
performance objectives by appropriately taking routing decisions, and decisions about actuating 
different signals for smooth traffic flow;  this is a large scale distributed system. There are several 
other domains where CPS examples can be seen e.g. Healthcare, Robotics, Automotive, Power 
Grid, Avionics and Transportation. Such system necessitates a deeper understanding of system 
behaviour and also provides feedback to augment system design to achieve overall objectives from 
the system. Emergence of ubiquitous computing and communication has open enormous 
opportunities to provide new capabilities to systems e.g. robotics assisted remote surger y. Many 
(small) systems can work in collaborative/cooperative manner to achieve a larger overall objective. 
The examples can be seen in robotics and modern warfare where collaboration/cooperation 
achieves larger objectives. The communication capability als o provides a possibility of distributed 
learning for systems.Hybrid system modelling is one of the possible approaches to model CPS. 
Hybrid system approach allows inclusion of both continuous time and discrete time states 
(variables) in the model.  
The sea mless integration of cyber system with physical system also poses several challenges 
towards system security against possible system attacks. With modelling of physical system, it is 
necessary to model different possible attacks and to provide adequate sec urity at hardware and 
software to ensure overall system security in all scenarios. The cyber component includes hardware 
and associated software. The design of cyber component also requires software level abstraction to 
have system level model of cyber com ponent. This also allows designing a very high reliability 
system as the model allows a predictable behaviour. Conventionally software is developed without 
formal models and largely depends on programmers‟ experience and knowledge; however, 
requirement of safety, reliability in CPS demand higher level of abstractions at software level as 
well. This allows the system remains correct and secure by design. 
Objective of the Programme 
The program aims to produce competent engineerswho can design engineered syste ms that are 
built from seamless integration of physical system and cyber systems. The program will enable 
engineers with required competency to design software -hardware architecture. The program also 
imparts knowledge of several tools for modelling physica l systems and tools for designing cyber 
components. The program will produce professionals who can design predictable and secure Cyber 
Physical Systems (CPS).  
Expected Graduate Attributes (M.Tech) 
1. Ability to understand modern approaches to Model CPS. 
2. Appreciation of cross disciplinary interaction of cyber and Physical systems.  
3. Capability to design cyber components to meet the overall specifications of a unified system.  
4. Adequate design knowledge to ensure system remains correct by design. 
5. Ability to use knowledge from machine learning, control theory to achieve overall objectives 
of a given CPSs.   
6. High quality technical communication skills. 
7. Appreciation and adherence to norms of professional ethics. 
8. Ability to plan and manage technical projects. 
 
200 
 
Learning outcome: 
1. Ability to analyse overall specifications of CPS and translate it to the different sub -
systems design requirements.  
2. Adequate competency to model overall CPS using Hybrid system and other approaches 
and validate the model.  
3. Capability toco-design hardware-software architecture in distributed environment. 
4. Knowledge of Machine Learning algorithms and Distributed Control algorithms.  
5. Methods to embedded security in overall design of CPS. 
6. Ability to understand applications like smart grid, mobile networks and different systems 
of smart city.  
7. Critical thinking and scientific problem solving.  
8. Skill to communicate scientific ideas and /or application systems.  
9. Acquire basic project management skills 
 
Topics Cloud for the CPS program 
 Modelling of CPS system from Hybrid system‟s perspectives 
 Distributed computing; FoG and Cloud computing 
 Embedded System design (Using programmable system-on-chip approach) 
 Real time operating system 
 Communication protocols 
 Networked and distributed Control system  
 Algorithms of Machine Learning 
 Digital Signal Processing 
  
201 
 
Proposed Program’s Structure Overall Structure 
Category Program 
Core (MC) 
Program 
Elective (ME) 
Open 
Elective 
(MO) 
Project  
(MP) 
Total 
Graded 
Credits 
Total 
Graded + 
Nongraded 
Credits 
Credits 18 18 06 16 58 62 
 
Semester wise distribution of credits 
Cat
. 
Course Title L-T-P Credi
ts 
 Cat
. 
Course Title L-
T-P 
Credi
ts 
I Semester  II Semester 
MC Introduction to Cyber 
Physical Systems 
3-0-0 3  MC Security in  CPS 2-0-
0 
2 
MC Cyber Physical System 
Modelling  and Simulation 
Laboratory 
0-0-2 1  MC Data Communication and 
Networking 
3-0-
0 
3 
 MC Advanced Control System 3-0-
0 
3 
MC  Introduction to Modelling 
(Fractal offered by Dept. Of 
Mathematics) 
1-0-0 1  MC Embedded System Design 3-0-
0 
3 
MC Simulation of Dynamical  
Systems  
1-0-0 1  ME Program Elective-3 3-0-
0 
3 
ME Program Elective-1 3-0-0 3  MC Embedded System Design 
Laboratory 
0-0-
2 
1 
ME Program Elective-2 3-0-0 3 
MO Open Elective-1 3-0-0 3 
NG Technical Communication 1-0-0 1  NG Innovation and IP 
Management  
1-0-
0 
1 
Total(Graded+Non-graded) 16  Total(Graded+Non-graded) 16 
 
III Semester  IV Semester 
MP Project-1    6  MP Project-2  10 
ME Program Elective-4 3-0-0 3  MO Open Elective- 2 3-0-
0 
3 
ME Program Elective-5 3-0-0 3  NG Professional Ethics 1-0-
0 
1 
ME Program Elective-6 3-0-0 3      
NG Systems Engineering and   1-0-      1      
202 
 
Project Management 0 
Total(Graded+Non-graded) 16  Total(Graded+Non-graded) 14 
 
List of Program Electives 
Course Title L-T-P Credit
s 
Department offers 
the course 
Computer Vision 3-0-0 3 CSE 
Advanced Digital Signal Processing 3-0-0 3 EE 
Vehicular Ad-Hoc 
Networks(VANETs) 
3-0-0 3 CSE 
Edge & Fog Computing 3-0-0 3 CSE 
Robotics : Fractal 1 Robot Modelling 1-0-2 2 ME 
Robotics : Fractal 2 Control 1-0-0 1 ME 
Robotics : Fractal 3  Motion 
Planning and Programming  
1-0-0 1 ME 
Machine Learning I 3-0-0 3 CSE 
Digital and Systems-on-Chips 
Design 
3-0-0 3 EE 
Introduction to Virtual Reality 3-0-0 3 CSE 
Smart Grid 3-0-0 3 EE 
Adaptive Signal processing 3-0-0 3 EE 
Computer Architecture 3-0-0 3 CSE 
Digital Twin 3-0-0 3 EE 
Machine Leaning II 3-0-0 3 CSE 
Artificial Intelligence I 3-0-0 3 CSE 
Artificial Intelligence II 3-0-0 3 CSE 
Smart Manufacturing  1-0-2 2 ME 
Resource Constrained AI 3-0-0 3 CSE 
Real Time Communications 3-0-0 3 EE 
Industry 4.0 Applications in  
Manufacturing Systems  
1-0-0 1 ME 
Optimization 1-0-0 1 Mathematics 
 
The department may add new electives from time to time.  
203 
 
Title Introduction to Cyber Physical Systems Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. Cyber Physical Systems Type Core 
Prerequisite Differential Equations, Basics of Microprocessors   
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. introduce modeling of CPS 
2. introduce ability to analyze and simulate CPS systems    
 
Learning Outcomes  
     The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. apply modeling and associated tools for Hybrid system  
2. to analyze CPS by with holistic models of cyber and physical components. 
 
Contents  
Motivation and examples of CPS e.g. Energy, Medical and Transportation cyber physical 
systems; Key design drivers and quality attributes of CPS. Attributes of high confidence CPS; (8 
hours) 
 
Continuous systemsmodeling; Discrete time system modeling; Finite state machine; Extended 
state machines; Hybrid system modeling; Classes of Hybrid Systems. (17 Hours) 
 
Analysis and Verification: 
Basic concepts of embedded systems; Embedded Processors; Input -outputs; Invariants and 
Temporal Logic; Linear Temporal Logic; Equivalence and Refinement; Development of models 
from specifications; Rechability analysis and Model Checking (17 Hours) 
 
Text Books  
1. R. Rajkumar, D. de. Niz and M. Klein, (2017), Cyber Physical Systems, Addision-Wesely. 
2. E.A.Lee and S A Shesia, (2018), Embedded system Design: A Cyber-Physical Approach, 
Second Edition, MIT Press. 
3. A.Platzer, (2017), Logical Foundations of Cyber Physical Systems, Springer. 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Basics of Differential equations and basics of Microprocessors from any standard textbook.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
204 
 
Title Embedded System Design Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. Cyber Physical Systems Type Core 
Prerequisite Basics of Microprocessors   
 
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. introduce concepts of different architectures and programming languages of embedded 
processors.  
2. introduce design of embedded systems.   
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. program and to design embedded system using 32 -bit embedded processors based on 
system specifications.  
2. use different IDE and debugging tools.    
 
Contents  
Review of Embedded Computing; embedded system design process; CPS and embedded 
Computing (3 Hours) 
 
Architecture of ARM Cortex M3 and Cortex A series processors; Memory system mechanism; 
Cache; Memory management units and address translation; Performance a ssessment of 
embedded processor; Introduction to Embedded Multicore Architecture 
(16 Hours) 
 
Programming of Embedded processors using assembly and C; models for program --data flow 
graphs; Assembly language programming of ARM Cortex M3; Hardware software c o-design; 
(13 Hours) 
 
Processes and real time operating systems; Multi -rate system; real time scheduling algorithms 
e.g. RMA,EDF and their variants; Energy efficient scheduling algorithms; Examples of design of 
embedded systems.  (8 Hours) 
 
Text Books  
 
1. JoshephYiu, (2013), The definitive Guide to ARM Cortex M3 and M4 Processors, 3rd  Edition, 
Elsevier.  
2. Marilyn Wolf, (2014), High Performance embedded Computing: Applications in Cyber 
Physical Systems and Mobile Computing, 2nd  Edition, Elsevier.    
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Prof. Santanu Chaudhary, Introduction to Embedded Computing, NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108102045/# 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. Marilyn Wolf, Computers as Components: Principles of Embedded Computing System 
Design, Third Edition, Elsevier 2012.  
 
205 
 
Title Advanced Control  Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. Cyber Physical Systems Type Core 
Prerequisite Differential equations and Basics of Control system 
desirable 
  
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. introduce Multi-Agent based Modeling control algorithms 
2. introduce robust controller for distributed systems  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. evaluate different controllers for a given distributed system. 
2. use different tools to design robust controllers 
  
 
Contents  
Review of state space analysis and feedback control design; Problem of estimation and 
observer design; Cooperative control motivation and examples. (7 Hours) 
 
Distributed Control: Sources of uncertainty and r obust control; Concepts of Sliding Mode 
control and its applications to Robust control design for distributed systems; Robust observer 
design. (14 Hours) 
 
Design behaviour of swarms Consensus problem and distributed flocking behaviour; Stability 
analysis of flocking motion; (8 Hours) 
 
Event Triggered Control: Introduction to event based sampling; stability with event based 
sampling; event based multi agent systems; consensus with event triggered control (7 Hours)  
 
Control of Cyber physical systems: Control of CPS with logic specifications, symbolic models for 
nonlinear system and extension to large classes of systems. (6 Hours)    
 
Textbooks 
1. Jeff Shamma, Cooperative Control of Distributed Multi-agent Systems, Wiley, 2008 
2. Edwards, Christopher, and Sarah Spurgeon, Sliding mode control: theory and applications , 
CRC Press, 1998. 
 
Other references: 
1. Tabuada, Paulo. "Event-triggered real-time scheduling of stabilizing control 
tasks." IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 52.9 (2007): 1680-1685. 
 
PreparatoryCourse Material 
Basics of Control System from Norman Nice, 2007. 
 
 
 
 
206 
 
Title Simulation of Dynamical Systems Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 
Offered for M.Tech. Cyber Physical System Type Core  
Prerequisite Basics of ODE   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce different techniques to simulate different class of systems.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Use different tools for simulating systems using right set of simulation parameters  
Contents  
Simulation as problem solving tool; Basic principles of numeric integration; Euler integration; 
difference equation simulation (3 hours) 
Runge–Kutta Algorithms; stabi lity domains of  Runge –Kutta Algorithms; extrapolation 
technique; solver for Differential Algebraic Equations; (4 hours) 
Random variables; probability distribution; poison process; Markov process; Markov chain, 
Bayesian statistics; simulated annealing; Monte-Carlo simulation (7 hours) 
Textbooks 
1. François E. Cellier  and Ernesto Kofman (2006), Continuous Systems Simulation , 
Springer 2006 
 
2. Sheldon M. Ross (2013), Simulation, Academic Press, 5th Edition.  
207 
 
Title Cyber Physical System Modelling Laboratory Number EEP7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 0–0–2 [1] 
Offered for M.TechCyber Physical System Type Core 
Prerequisite ODE   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce techniques to model/simulate different Cyber Physical Systems 
2. Introduce techniques to verify different CPS models 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Use different tools for Modelling/Simulation and verifications.  
 
Contents 
Modelling experiments in continuous, discrete and hybrid sys tem; Verification of model using 
different techniques; Sensitivity analysis of Models; Sensitivity analysis of Hybrid Models; 
Scheduling in embedded system 
 
  
208 
 
Title  Embedded System Design Laboratory  Number EEP7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 0–0–2 [1] 
Offered for M.Tech.Cyber Physical System Type Core 
Prerequisite Basics of Processors   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Design experimentations to ensure students get practical exposure for embedded system 
design tools.  
2. Introduce students overall design process of embedded systems using Integrated 
Development Environment (IDE).  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. 1. Use assembly and high level languages to program 32-bit processors 
2. Design interfacing circuits for embedded processors 
 
Contents 
Programming Cortex M3 processors using assembly and C language; Interfacing the processors 
with LCD, Seven Segment; DC Motor; Key board etc.; use of serial communication with 
processors; Interfacing sensors through ADC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
209 
 
Title Smart Grid  Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. Cyber Physical System Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Concepts and topics that are relevant to smart grid technologies to facilitate exploring 
    research opportunities.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
    The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand main concepts of smart grid development and the critical technologies tha t 
underpin such development, their basic principles, physical constraints, and technological 
potentials 
 
Contents  
Smart Grid Basics: Evolution of Electric Power Grid and Smart Grid, Objectives, main features 
and challenges of smart grid (5 Hours) 
 
Energy resources : centralized vs. distributed generation; renewable energy: solar, wind, 
hydropower, biomass, geothermal, ocean wave; benefit, costs, and policies of renewable 
energy; renewable sources  integration – overcoming intermittence; storage systems 
technology (10 Hours) 
 
Plug-in Electric Vehicle(PEV): history of EV; PEV challenges and potential solutions; EV and 
electric power grid; PEV charging infrastructure, challenges and solutions; PEV as an energy 
storage device and an energy source (V2G). (9 Hours) 
 
Demand-side management: load profile of the power grid; market pricing; peak shaving and 
valley filling; load forecasting; regulations and policies. (9 Hours) 
 
Monitoring and Protection: wide -area monitoring system (WAMS), SCADA and PMU; advanced 
metering infrastructure (AMI); smart metering; communication infrastructure and technologies 
(9 Hours) 
 
Textbooks  
1. J. Duncan Glover, Mulukutla S. Sarma, and Thomas J. Overbye, (2008), Power System 
Analysis and Design, 4th Ed.,Stamford, CT: Cengage Learning,. 
2. Jan Machowski, JanuszBialek, and James R. Bumby, (2008), Power Systems Dynamics, 
Stability and Control, 2nd Ed.New York, New York: John Wiley. 
3. B. Droste-Franke, et al.,(2012), Balancing Renewable Electricity – energy storage, demand 
side management, and network extension from an interdisciplinary perspective. Heidelberg, 
Germany: Springer. 
4. T. Ackermann, Ed.,(2005), Wind Power in Power Systems. New York, New York: Wiley.  
 
 
210 
 
Title Security in Cyber Physical Systems Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 
Offered for M.Tech. Cyber Physical System Type Core 
Prerequisite Basics of Control system is desirable   
 
Objectives 
 
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce mathematical framework for Cyber Physical System attacks  
2. Introduce centralized and decentralized techniques of attack detection  
 
Learning Outcomes  
 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Analyze the system for possible security vulnerability.   
2. Design attack resilient system.    
  
 
Contents  
Review of  graph theory based models; some examples from infrastructure system modelling; 
Descriptor system; Unified modelling of CPS attack; case of undetectable attacks; (7 Hours)  
 
Graph theoretic characterization of attacks and its limitations; Centralized and distribut ed 
monitors; examples from power system, water distribution networks etc. (7 Hours)   
 
Security issues of Industrial Control Systems; Integrity attacks on SCADA systems; Model 
based technique to detect integrity attacks on sensors; threat model and its eff ect on control 
scheme; countermeasure for detecting such attacks; watermarking scheme;  (7 Hours)  
 
Design of observers under sensor and actuator attacks; design of observer for distributed 
environment under different attacks; applications of swarms of UAVs ; Control design with 
denial service attack; case studies (6 Hours) 
 
 
 References 
1. F. Pasqualetti, F. Dörfler and F. Bullo, "Attack Detection and Identification in Cyber -Physical 
Systems," in IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control , vol. 58, no. 11, pp. 2715-2729, Nov. 
2013. 
2. H. Fawzi, P. Tabuada and S. Diggavi, "Secure Estimation and Control for Cyber -Physical 
Systems Under Adversarial Attacks," in  IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control , vol. 59, no. 
6, pp. 1454-1467, June 2014. 
3. Yilin Mo, Rohan Chabukswar  and Bruno Sinopoli  “Detecting Integrity Attacks on SCADA 
Systems” in IEEE Transactions on Control System Technology, Vol. 22, No. 4, 2014 
4. F. Pasqualetti, F. Dörfler and F. Bullo  “Control Theoretic methods for Cyber Physical 
Security”, in IEEE Control System Magazine, pp. 110-127, Feb. 2015 
 
PreparatoryCourse Material 
Basics of Control System from Norman Nice, 2007.  
 
 
 
211 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Proposal  
 
For 
 
 
 
M. Tech. in Sensors and Internet of Things 
(SIoT) 
 
 
 
Program Structure for first four semesters 
 
 
 
 
 
 
212 
 
Introduction 
Last few decades had seen extensive growth in the electronic systems to make the life of 
humans smoother and easier with time. With enormous features available in various systems, a 
new era of engineering, Internet of Things (IoT), has gained interest. IoT is a network of connected 
things and people, which collects and communicates data from environment around them. To be 
able to do so, Sensors are the key components to communicate with surroundings. Applications of 
Sensors and Inte rnet of Things ( SIoT) include smart agriculture, transportation, environment 
monitoring, healthcare, and smart wearable. The M.Tech. Program in sIoT is especially designed for 
young innovators to provide them a breadth as well as depth for designing system s for the current 
era of sIoT. M.Tech.+Ph.D. Dual Degree program will have same course work as M.Tech. sIoT for 
first two years. However, Dual Degree program is specially designed to encourage talented and 
motivated B.Tech./M.Sc. students to undertake direct Ph.D. study in the area of sIoT. 
 
Objective 
To produce skilled graduates with exposure to current era of SIoT and deeper understanding 
of the subject components. The graduates will eventually be contributing to variety of domains 
including smart agricul ture, transportation, environment monitoring, healthcare, and smart 
wearable. 
 
Program’s Scope 
The objective is to develop broad IoT systems and this program will be offered with four Primary 
verticals. 
 Sensors and Sensing Technologies 
 Circuits and Systems 
 Communication and Networking 
 Embedded systems 
The program will offer deeper theoretical learning through various verticals by theory and 
laboratory courses. Hands on experiments and projects will be offered to enhance the learning. For 
Dual Degree Ph.D., ~2 additional years will be dedicated towards research contributions. 
 
Graduate attributes 
 Ability to follow multidisciplinary approach for design and implementation of systems, 
involving various domains of Engineering, Sciences, and Humanities. 
 Skills to design and develop various sensors and related interfacing circuitry for IoT 
 Ability to develop design, simulation, and implementation schemes based on the knowledge 
acquired from coursework. 
 Skills to implement IoT sensor platforms for applications in the  area of environment, health, 
agriculture, and other novel applications. 
 Skills to undertake high quality academic and industrial research in Sensors and IoT 
Learning outcomes 
 Strong understanding of fundamentals of Sensing and Sensor Devices  
 Ability of designing Digital and Analog interface circuits used for SIoT 
 Capability of interfacing Sensors for IoT applications 
 Development and use of emerging Sensors for IoT Technology 
 Understanding of fundamentals of wireless communications to design Sensor Nodes 
 Implementation of IoT platforms using embedded systems 
 Understanding of uses and risks related to IoT devices 
  
213 
 
Program’s Structure 
Overall Structure 
Category M.Tech 
Compulsory 
(MC) 
M. Tech Elective 
(ME) 
M. Tech Open 
(MO) 
M. Tech 
Project (MP) 
Total 
Credits 19 17 6 16 58 
 
Semester wise distribution of credits 
Cat
. 
Course Title L-T-P Cr.  Cat
. 
Course Title L-T-P Cr. 
I Semester  II Semester 
MC Sensors and 
Measurement 
3-0-0 3  MC Data communication and 
Networking 
3-0-
0 
3 
MC Microsystems Fabrication 
Technology 
3-0-0 3  MC Digital and Systems-on-
Chip Design 
3-0-
0 
3 
MC Analog and Interfacing 
Circuits 
3-0-0 3  MC VLSI Design Lab 0-0-
2 
1 
MC Introduction to Internet 
of Things 
1-0-0 1  ME Program Elective-2 3-0-
0 
3 
MC Sensors and IoT Lab 0-0-2 1  ME Program Elective-3 3-0-
0 
3 
ME Program Elective-1 3-0-0 3  ME Program Elective-4 3-0-
0 
3 
NG Technical Communication 1-0-0 1  NG Innovation and IP 
Management  
1-0-
0 
1 
Total (Graded + Non-graded) 15  Total (Graded + Non-graded) 17 
Winter Term       
MC Winter Internship 1      
Total 1    
   
III Semester  IV Semester 
MP Project-1  5  MP Project-2  11 
ME Program Elective-5 3-0-0 3  MO Open Elective-2 3-0-
0 
3 
ME Program Elective-6 2-0-0 2  NG Professional Ethics 1-0-
0 
1 
MO Open Elective-1 3-0-0 3      
214 
 
NG Systems Engineering and 
Project Management 
1-0-0 1      
Total (Graded+ Non-graded) 14  Total (Graded+ Non-graded)l 15 
 
Winter Internship is designed for hands-on-exposure in micro-fabrication 
technology for sensors and actuators 
List of Program Electives 
Course Title L-T-
P 
Cre
dits 
 Course Title L-T-P Cre
dits 
First/Third Semester  Third Semester 
Flexible and Printed Electronics 3-0-0 3  Advanced Digital Signal 
Processing 
3-0-0 3 
Digital VLSI  Design 3-0-0 3  Neuromorphic Computing and 
Design 
3-0-0 3 
Wireless Communication 3-0-0 3  Fog and Edge Computing 3-0-0 3 
Antenna Engineering 3-0-0 3  Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks 3-0-0 3 
    Machine Learning 1 3-0-0 3 
    Selected Topics in Sensors & 
IoT I 
1-0-0 1 
 
Second Semester  Fourth Semester 
Image Sensor Design and 
Applications 
3-0-0 3  Resource Constrained AI 3-0-0 3 
RF IC Design 3-0-0 3  Microfluidics Technology 3-0-0 3 
Embedded Systems Design 3-0-0 3  Selected Topics in Sensors & 
IoT II 
2-0-0 2 
Active Filter Design 3-0-0 3  Selected Topics in Sensors & 
IoT III 
3-0-0 3 
Millimeter-wave Technology 3-0-0 3     
Nano Sensors 3-0-0 3     
Open electives: These can be taken from the existing program electives or any other course of 
same level from the institute 
  
215 
 
Course Title Sensors and Measurements Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M. Tech. 1st year Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite Semiconductor Devices    
Objective 
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce the students to sensors, as transducers from physical parameters to signals 
2. Explain the sensing principles for displacement, force, pressure, acceleration, 
temperature, optical radiation, nuclear radiation 
3. Explain the sensor range, sensitivity, accuracy, repeatability, noise 
  
Learning Outcomes 
Students are expected to have the ability to 
1. Understand fundamental principles of sensing technology,  
2. Design various sensors and implementation 
3. Understand Nondestructive characterization methods 
 
Contents 
EEL7XX1: Sensor characteristics [1-0-0] 
(Fractal 1 ) Definitions, terminology, classification, Static vs dynamic properties of transducers, 
Transfer functions, Ideal and realistic transducer models, Resolution, linearization, dynamic 
range, detection threshold, Selectivity  & sensitivity, Calibration, Errors of the experimental 
measurements, Noise: electronics, environmental & internal (14 lectures)  
EEL7XX2: Physical Principle of Sensing [1-0-0] 
(Fractal 2)  Capacitance, Magnetism, Induction, Resistance, Piezoelectric effect , Pyroelectric 
effect, Hall effect, Thermoelectric effect, Temperature and thermal properties of materials and 
heat transfer, Optics, Fiber optics and waveguides (14 lectures) 
 
EEL7XX3: Sensor Interface and Applications [1-0-0] 
(Fractal 3)  Input characteri stics of interface circuits, Amplifiers, Light to voltage converters, 
Capacitance to voltage converters, Bridge Circuits, Excitation circuits . Case Studies: Inertial 
Sensors (Accelerometer & gyroscope), Healthcare Sensors (Glucometer, ECG & MRI), Smart 
building Sensors (Smoke & occupancy sensors) (14 lectures) 
Text Books 
1. Jacob Fraden, (2010), Handbook of Modern Sensors, 5th Edition, Springer. 
2. J. W. Gardner, (1996), Microsensors, Principles and Applications, 1st Edition, Wiley. 
3. S. M. Sze, (1994), Semiconductor Sensors, 1st Edition, Wiley. 
 
  
216 
 
Course Title  Analog and Interfacing 
Circuits 
Number EEL7XX0 
 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M. Tech. 1st year Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite Digital and Analog Electronics    
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Familiarize students with the concepts of Analog IC Design and give them a 
comprehensive overview of various amplifiers. 
2. Familiarize the students with different building blocks of a mixed signal interface circuit 
design essential for sensors and IoT. 
Learning Outcomes 
Students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand fundamental principles of CMOS Analog IC Design and interfacing of analog 
signals with the digital signal processing circuits. 
2. Apply the circuit design fundamentals for IoT applications. 
3. Work on design tools like Cadence/Mentor Graphics 
Contents 
EEL7XX1: Fundamentals of Analog Circuits and Design [1-0-0] 
(Fractal 1)  Introduction to  Analog VLSI and design issues in CMOS technologies, MOS 
models, SPICE Models, Single stage amplifiers, Biasing circuits, Voltage and Current 
reference circuits, Feedback analysis, Multistage amplifiers, Mismatch and noise analysis, 
Differential amplifiers, Oscillators (14 Lectures) 
EEL7XX2: Readout Electronics [1-0-0] 
(Fractal 2) Switch capacitor circuits: Principles and applications in filter design; switches and 
related design issues, variable gain amplifier, low noise and high speed amplifier topologies . 
Analog to digital converters:  Types of ADCs, static and dynamic characteristics; track and 
hold, and sample and hold circuits; comparators; detail design analysis for successive 
approximation register (SAR) ADCs, discrete -time and continuous time sigma -delta ADCs  
(14 Lectures) 
EEL7XX3: Digital to Analog Converters Design [1-0-0] 
(Fractal 3) Digital to Analog Converters:  Voltage-based DACs; charge -based DACs; current-
based DACs – binary and thermometer currents . Phase-locked loop: Basics; PLL dynamics; 
voltage controlled oscillator, frequ ency synthesis . Applications: Wearable Biomedical IoT 
nodes (14 Lectures) 
Text Books 
1. Razavi, B., (2016), Design of Analog CMOS Integrated Circuits , 2nd Edition, McGraw-Hill 
Education. 
2. R. Jacob Baker, H.W.Li, and D.E. Boyce, (2009), – CMOS Circuit Design ,Layout and 
Simulation, 2nd Edition, Prentice-Hall of India 
3. David A. Johns, Ken Martin, (2013), “Analog Integrated Circuit Design”, 2 nd Edition, John 
Wiley and Sons. 
 
 
217 
 
Self Learning material 
1. Shanthi Pavan, VLSI Data Conversion Circuits , NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras , 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117106034/ 
2. Nagendra Krishnapura, Analog Integrated Circuit Design, Department of Electrical 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117106030/ 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. P. E. Allen, D. R. Holberg  (2013), CMOS Analog Circuit Design, 3rd Edition , Oxford 
University Press. 
2. R. Gregorian, G. C. Temes,  (2008), “Analog MOS Integrated Circuits for Signal 
Processing”, John Wiley and Sons. 
  
218 
 
Course Title Microsystems Fabrication 
Technology 
Number EEL7XX0 
 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M. Tech. 1st year Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite Semiconductor Devices    
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce to the students the essentials of micro -electronics fabrication technology required for 
the realization of integrated circuits and transducers & actuators. 
2. I ntroduce the basic concepts of MEMS design, fabrication process integration and advanced 
micro-machining techniques for high aspect ratio MEMS structures.   
Learning Outcomes 
Students will have the capability to : 
1. Understand the unit fabrication processes for ICs and MEMS 
2. Design and fabricate MEMS based sensors and actuators  
 
Contents 
Unit processes in fabrication of ICs and MEMS: Clean room practices, Crystal growth techniques, 
wafer preparation and shaping, chemical cleaning, thermal oxidation, diffusion, ion implantation, 
photolithography, Thin film deposition, Etching (18 lectures) 
Unit processes specific to MEMS: Surface and bu lk micro-machining, DRIE, LIGA, and packaging  
(12 lectures) 
Case studies of MEMS : Basic concepts of Beam/diaphragm mechanics, electrostatic actuation and 
fabrication, „process design‟ for selected MEMS based sensors and actuators such as Comb drives, 
touch sensor, pressure sensor, RF MEMS Switches, Electric / Magnetic Field sensor etc.   
(12 lectures ) 
Text books: 
1. Tai-Ran Hsu, (2017),  MEMS & Microsystems Design and Manufacture , Indian Edition, Tata 
McGraw-Hill 
2. M. Bao, (2005), Analysis and Design Principles of MEMS Devices, 1st Edition, Elsevier 
3. J. D. Plummer, M. D. Deal, and P. B. Griffin (2009), Silicon VLSI technology: Fundamentals, 
practice, and modelling, 1st Edition, Prentice Hall 
 
Self learning material 
1. Marc J. Madou, (2011), Fundamentals of Microfabrication and Nanotechnology : The Science 
of Miniaturization, 3rd Edition, CRC Press. 
2. M. Sze, (2003), VLSI Technology, 2nd edition McGraw Hill Education. 
 
219 
 
Preparatory course material 
1. Sensors and Actuators (Elsevier) 
2. J. Micromechanics and Micro engineering  (IOP) 
 
  
220 
 
Title Introduction to Internet of Things Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 
Offered for M. Tech. 1st year Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide overview of applications of IoT and relevant technologies 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Identify and integrate different components required for IoT applications 
 
Contents  
Introduction to IoT: Sensing, Actuation, Basics of IoT Networking (2 Lectures) 
IoT Architecture, Communication Protocols for IoT (2 Lectures) 
Sensor Networks: Wireless Sensor Network, Sensor nodes (2 Lectures) 
Machine to machine Communication: Introduction, Node types and M2M Applications, 
Integration of Sensors and Actuators for Implementation of IoT (4 Lectures) 
Introduction to Cloud, Fog, and Edge Computing, Smart cities and Smart homes, Industrial IoT  
(4 Lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Kamal, R., (2017) , Internet of Things - Architecture and Design Principles , 1st Edition, 
Mcgraw Hill. 
 
Preparatory Course Material  
1. Misra, S., Introduction to Internet of Things , NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Computer Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106105166/ 
 
   
221 
 
Title Data Communication and Networking Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M. Tech. 1st year Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Fundamentals of Wireless Communications   
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1.  Expose the students to distinguishing features of wireless networks 
 
Learning Outcomes  
     The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Design and optimize wireless network architectures. 
2. Implement security techniques for wireless networks. 
 
Contents  
Fundamentals: Layered architecture overview, data communication techniques , 
motivations for cross -layer protocol design, m otivations for performance analysis, 
forward error correction and re-transmission performances (7 Lectures) 
Network layer and topology design: Markov and semi -Markov processes, Little‟s 
theorem, M/M/m/k, M/G/1 systems, priority queueing, network of qu eues, network 
traffic behavior, routing algorithms and analysis , distributed networks, design 
constraints, bounded latency networks, optimization, cognitive networks (10 Lectures)  
Network Management: Power management, time synchronization, localization, en ergy-
efficient protocols for sensor networks (7 Lectures) 
Mechanisms to improve performance : Self-Organizing Netwo rk, Software -Defined 
Networking (7 Lectures) 
Transport and Application Layers: congestion control and quality of service, scheduling , 
multimedia, key aspects and design issues (7 Lectures) 
Reliability and  security: Security requirement and attacks, Encryption techniques, 
reliable and secure communication protocols (4 Lectures) 
 
Textbook 
1. Dargie, W., and Poellabauer, C., (2010), Fundamentals of  
Wireless Sensor Networks: Theory and Practice, Wiley 
2. Stallings, W., (2007), Data and Computer Communications, 8th Edition, Pearson 
3. Bertsekas, D. P. and Gallager, R. G., (1992), Data Networks, 2nd Edition, Prentice 
Hall  
 
 
222 
 
Self-Learning Material 
1. Mishra, S., Wireless Adhoc and Sensors Networks , NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Electrical and Electronics Communication Engineering, Indian 
Institute of Technology Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106105160/ 
2. Zou, Y., Zhu, J., Wang, X., and Hanzo, L., "A Survey on Wireless Security: Technical 
Challenges, Recent Advances, and Future Trends," in Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 
104, no. 9, pp. 1727-1765, Sept. 2016. 
3. W. Xia, Y. Wen, C. H. Foh, D. Niyato and H. Xie, "A Survey on Software -Defined 
Networking," in IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 27-51, 
First quarter 2015. 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. Zheng, L., Principles of Wireless Communications, MIT OpenCourseWare, Electrical 
Engineering & Computer Science, Massachuse tts Institute of Technology, 
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-452-
principles-of-wireless-communications-spring-2006/index.htm 
 
  
223 
 
Course Title Digital and Systems-on-Chip 
Design 
Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M. Tech. 1st year Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite Digital Logic and Design    
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Make the students analyze the functional and nonfunctional performance of the 
system early in the design process to support design decisions.  
2. Make the students appreciate issues in system -on-a-chip design associated with co -
design, such as intellectual property, reuse, and verification. 
3. Explain the hardware, software, and interface synthesis.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to:  
1. Analyze hardware/software tradeoffs, algorithms, and architectures to optimize the 
system based on requirements and implementation constraints.  
2. Understand issues in interface design.  
3. Use co-simulation to validate system functionality.  
 
Contents  
Digital Design using Verilog and VHDL: Introduction to ASIC design, combinational and 
sequential circuit design process, Finite state machines, Modelling styles, RTL models, 
Memory models. Programmable logic devices and FPGAs: PALs, PLDs, FPGA programming 
concepts and techniques, design synthesis using FPGA kits (14 lectures) 
System-level and SoC d esign methodologies and tools; HW/SW co -design: analysis, 
partitioning, real -time scheduling, hardware acceleration; Virtual platform models, co -
simulation and FPGAs for prototyping of HW/SW systems; Transaction -Level Modeling (TLM), 
Electronic System-Level (ESL) languages: SystemC; High -Level Synthesis (HLS): allocation, 
scheduling, binding, resource sharing, pipelining; SoC and IP integration, verification and 
test. ARM-based System-on-Chip Design. (28 lectures) 
Text Books 
1. Unsalan, C., Tar, B., (2017), Digital System Design with FPGA Implementation Using 
Verilog and VHDL, McGraw-Hill 
2. D. Black, J. Donovan, (2010), SystemC: From the Ground Up, 2nd Edition, Springer.  
3. D. Gajski, S. Abdi, A. Gerstlauer, G. Schirner, (2009), Embedded System Design: 
Modeling, Synthesis, Verification, Springer 
 
Preparatory Course material 
1. Nelson, V.P., Carroll, B.D., Nagle, H.T., Irwin, J.D., (2020), Digital Logic Circuit 
Analysis and Design, 2nd Edition, Pearson 
2. G. De Micheli, (2017), Synthesis and Optimization of Digital Circuits, McGraw-Hill.  
 
224 
 
Title Flexible and Printed Electronics Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. IV, M.Tech., Ph.D Type Elective 
Prerequisite Understanding of Electronic Materials and  
Devices 
  
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Explain fundamentals of thin-film electronic materials and devices for flexible 
electronics. 
2.  Teach  the concepts for heterogeneous integration of thin -film devices on flexible 
platforms. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Identify the advantages, drawbacks, performances, complementarity and 
uniqueness of large area manufacturing vs. silicon technology 
2.  Integrate the operation principles, architectures and processing of ma in devices and 
systems fabricated for flexible electronics 
3. Predict systems integration issues and propose methods for integration and 
encapsulation of printed devices and systems 
 
Contents  
Introduction to Flexible and Printed Electronics: Evolution of Flexible Electronics, review 
of cutting edge research on electronics that can be flexible, plastic, stretchable, 
conformable or printed. Electronic materials, components and systems, applications for 
IoT (2 Lectures) 
 
Materials, Processing, and Manufacturing: Various semiconductors, dielectric, and 
conducting materials, Organic semiconductors, from chemical bonds to bands, Charge 
injection and transport, Examples of printable functional materials , Thin-film Deposition 
and Processing Methods for Flexible Devices, Solution-based Patterning Processes; Ink-
jet printing, gravure and other processes , surface energy effects, multilayer pattern ing 
(12 Lectures) 
 
Flexible Thin-Film Transistors and Circuits: Thin -Film Transistor; D evice structure and 
performance, Electrical characteristics, parameter extraction, characterization methods  
for rigid and flexible devices, electrical stability, printed transistors; organic/polymer, 
225 
 
metal-oxide, electrolyte gated, Case studies; submicrometer OTFTs and gravure printed 
OTFTs, From transistors to circui ts, circuits on flexi ble and non - silicon substrates, 
Contacts and Interfaces to Organic and Inorganic Electronic Devices: Schottky contacts, 
defects, carrier recombination, effect of applied mechanical strain (14 Lectures) 
 
Other Flexible Devices and System Integration : Organic Light Emitting Diodes, Organic 
Solar Cells, thin flexible OLED displays, OLED lighting, smart wallpaper, sensors, lo gic, 
and memory, RFID tags, L atest appli cations of printed electronics, Encapsulation, Roll 
to roll printing processes, Integration Issues, and Designs for Future (14 Lectures) 
 
Textbook 
1. G. Nisato, D. Lupo, S. Ganz (Ed itors) (2016), Organic and Printed Electronics: 
Fundamentals and Applications, CRC Press 
2. Large Area and Flexible Electronics, Mario Caironi & Yong -Young Noh (Editors 
(2015), WILEY-VCH 
3. Wong, William S., and Alberto Salleo, (Eds.) (2009) Flexible electronics: materials 
and applications. Vol. 11. Springer 
 
Self Learning Material  
1.  Recent Journal Papers form Flexible and Printed Electronics, IOP , and Organic 
Electronics, Elsevier 
     
 
 
  
226 
 
Title Antenna Engineering Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. IV Year, M. Tech., Ph.D.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite Electromagnetic Theory, Microwave Engineering   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Introduce the various concept of antenna design. 
2. familiarize the students with the application of different type of antennas 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Design low profile antennas and high gain antenna arrays for practical applications 
2.  Utilize simulation software e.g. HFSS, CST etc. for designing Antenna systems and test RF 
and microwave antennas 
Contents  
Introduction to Antennas: Radiation mechanism, Current distribution on a thin wire antenna, 
Review of Antenna Parameters; Friis Transmission formulae, Radar Range equation (7 
Lectures) 
Radiation Integrals and Auxiliary Potential  Function Vector potential for electric current source 
and magnetic current source, inhomogeneous vector potential wave equation, duality theorem, 
reciprocity theorem (3 Lectures) 
Design of Dipole Antenna Design of Infinitesimal dipole, small dipole, half -wavelength dipole (4 
Lectures) 
Microstrip antenna Rectangular patch antenna, feeding methods, transmission line model, 
cavity model, Circular Patch Antenna  (4 Lectures) 
Low-profile Antenna Application: Mobile handset antenna - helical wire and variants; el ectrically 
small antenna; power factor, quality factor and bandwidth; radiation efficiency and realized 
gain;  PIFA;; On -chip antenna;  SAR measurement and miniaturization; GPS and Bluetooth 
antenna; medical application - antennas for medical imaging; heati ng; sensing; Automobile 
antennas- MAST antenna; Window glass antenna; Panel Antenna; (10 Lectures) 
Design of Antenna Arrays Analysis of Two element array, N -element linear array (uniform and 
nonuniform amplitude excitation: Binomial, Dolph -Tschebyscheff, T aylor distribution), planar 
array, Phased Array  (5 Lectures) 
Aperture Antenna Field equivalence principle, Radiation equation, Rectangular aperture, 
circular aperture, Babinet‟s principle, Sectoral horn antenna, Pyramidal Horn antenna  (6 
Lectures) 
Antenna Measurement Antenna Ranges, Radiation Pattern measurement, Gain measurement 
(absolute gain method, gain comparison method), Directivity measurement  (3 Lectures)  
227 
 
Textbook  
1. Balanis  C. A., Antenna Theory,  Analysis and Design, 4th edition, Wiley Press, 2016 
2. Krauss  J. D., Antennas and Wave Propagation, 4 th edition, Tata McGraw -Hill Education, 
2006 
3.  Elliott  R. S., Antenna Theory and Design, Wiley Press, 2006 
Self Learning Material   
1.   Vedio Lecture: Antenna Engineering, Dr. Anthony Ferraro, Penn State Univ., USA, 
http://www.engr.psu.edu/cde/courses/ee438/index.htm  
Preparatory Course Material  
1. NPTEL Lectures: Microwave Theory and Techniques, (Dr. Girish Kumar, IIT Bombay) 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108101112/ 
 
  
228 
 
Title Digital VLSI Design Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. IV, M.Tech., Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Digital Electronics, Knowledge of MOS device physics   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
• Introduce the basics of digital circuit design methods.  
• Explain the necessary concepts for digital  VLSI design according to design rules decided 
by various technologies. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
 Design and optimize digital circuits with different quality metrics: cost, speed, power 
dissipation, and reliability.   
 Learn about the major building blocks of digital systems 
Contents  
• Introduction: Review of VLSI, Historical Perspect ive, Issues in Digital IC design, Quality 
metrics. (2 Lectures) 
• Manufacturing: CMOS technology, Layout design & design rules, IC Packa ging, future 
trends in process technology. (2 Lectures) 
• Devices and Interconnects:  MOS devices, MOS transistor models, Technology Scaling, 
Effect of Process variations, Interconnect and wire models.  (4 Lectures) 
• CMOS Circuits: CMOS Inverter, Static and Dynamic Behaviour, Propagation delay, noise 
margins, and power dissipation, Impact of tech nology scaling, logical efforts. (7 
Lectures) 
• Designing combinational logic gates:  Static CMOS design, Ratioed Logic, Pseudo NMOS, 
Pass Transistors Logic, Dynamic CMOS design, speed and power dissipation, choosing a 
logic style (7 lectures).  
• Design of sequential logic circuits:  Static Latches and Registers, Dynamic Latches and 
Registers, Alternative Register styles, pipelining, choosing a clock strategy. (3 Lectures)  
• Timing Issues in Digital Circuits:   Timing classification, Synchronous Design, 
Synchronous timing basics, Skew and Jitter, clock distribution techniques (5 Lectures). 
• Designing Arithmetic Blocks:  Data paths in Digital Processor Architecture, Adder, 
Multiplier, Shifter, power and speed tradeoff. (3 Lectures).  
• Designing Memories and Array Structures:  Memory Classification, Memory Architecture 
and Building Blocks, Memory core, Read only Memory, Read -write Memories, Memory 
peripheral circuitry, Decoders, Sense Amplifiers, Buffers, reliability, power dissipation, 
future trends validation and test (7 Lectures).  
• Implementation strategies for digital ICs, Design Verification, Validation and Test, 
Introduction to HDL. (2 Lectures) 
 
 
 
229 
 
Textbook  
1. Jan M. Rabaey, Anantha Chandrakasan, and Borivoje Nikolic, (2016), Digital integrated 
Circuits, A design perspective, 2nd Edition, 2nd Edition, Pearson. 
2. Neil H.E. Weste, David Money Harris, (2010), CMOS VLSI Design: A Circuits and 
Systems Perspective, 4th Edition, Pearson. 
3. Sung-Mo-Kang, Yusuf Leblebici, (2016), CMOS Digital Integrated Circuits Analysis & 
Design, 4th Edition, Mc-Graw Hill. 
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Jan M. Rabaey, Anantha Chandrakasan, and Borivoje Nikolic, online Video lectures  
http://bwrcs.eecs.berkeley.edu/Classes/icdesign/ee241_s01/Lectures/ 
 
 
 
  
230 
 
Title Wireless Communications Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. IV, M.Tech., Ph.D. Type Elective  
Prerequisite Fundamentals of Communications   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide students an understanding of the concepts related to communication over  wireless 
fading channel. 
2.  Expose students to  concepts and techniques for exploiting fading and application  of these 
concepts in multiuser communication systems context. 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Understand concepts related to deep fade, diversity techniques and channel  capacity for 
point-to-point wireless communications systems. 
2. A nalyze multi -user networks and understanding of techniques like  opportunistic 
communication, multiuser diversity, superposition  coding and successive  interference 
cancellation. 
3.  Analyze and design wireless ad -hoc networks with special emphasis on energy  constrained 
networks 
 
Contents  
Wireless Channels : Modelling of wireless channels; space, time and frequency channel  
coherence; input/output channel models for single and multi-antenna systems (7 lectures) 
Diversity: Digital modulation and its performance in fading; inter -symbol interference; realizing 
diversity: time diversity, frequency diversity, antenna diversity; co de design for wireless  
channels (14 lectures) 
Wireless Channel Capacity : Capacity of the Gaussian channels; capacity of fading channels  (7 
lectures) 
Multiuser system design : Multiple access and random access techniques; multiuser channel  
capacity (7 lectures) 
Ad hoc wireless network : design principles, protocol layers, network capacity limits, and  
energy-constrained networks. (7 lectures) 
 
 
 
231 
 
Textbook  
1. Tse, D. and Viswanath, P., (2005), Fundamentals of wireless communication , Cambridge 
University Press. 
2.  Goldsmith, A., (2005), Wireless Communications, Cambridge University Press. 
3.  Simon, M. K. and Alouini, M. S., (2004 ), Digital communication over fading channels , John 
Wiley and Sons. 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Zheng, L., Principles of Wireless Comm unications, MIT OpenCourseWare, Electrical 
Engineering & Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-452-principles-
of-wireless-communications-spring-2006/index.htm 
   
Preparatory Course Material  
1. Jagannatham, A. K., Principles of Communication II , NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Electrical Engineering,        Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur,  
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108104098/  
2. Zheng, L. and Gallager,  R., Principles of Digital Communications I , MIT OpenCourseWare, 
Electrical Engineering & Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-450-principles-of-
digital-communications-i-fall-2006/ 
 
 
  
232 
 
Title Image Sensor Design and Applications Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech. IV, M. Tech, Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Analog electronics   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Introduce the design and analysis of CMOS image sensors.  
2.  Explain the readout electronics behind the camera. 
3.  Provide the knowledge of performance measures and tradeoffs involved in the 
camera design. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Design and develop CMOS image sensor including the sensing mechanism and signal 
chain of the camera. 
2.  Implement different techniques required for high dynamic range camera, high frame 
rate, low noise camera, time of flight 3D cameras etc. 
 
Contents 
 
Introduction to photodetectors:  Photodiode and photogate, photocurrent, dark current, 
quantum efficiency, spectral response and photo-conversion principles (5 Lectures). 
Introduction to Charge coupled devices and CMOS imag e sensors:  Operation, 
performance metrics, noise and its types, spatial resolution and modulation transfer 
function.  Concept of exposure triangle including aperture, shutter speed and ISO, color 
filters, Bayer pattern, Shutters and its types, motion blur,  hard and soft reset, 
Introduction to imaging optics (8 Lectures). 
Readout electronics and image sensor characterization:  Readout and its types, design 
tradeoffs and challenges, analysis of the signal path behind the camera, variable gain 
amplifiers, double sampling circuits,  ADCs, reference circuits including BGR and LDO, 
clock generation circuits including PLL and delay elements, floor planning, placement 
and routing, image sensor characterization. Introduction to wire bonding, packaging, 
lens and color filters for product level design (15 Lectures). 
Emerging trends: High speed cameras, high dynamic range cameras, 3D cameras for 
background light subtraction and depth estimation. Concepts of Polarization imaging, 
low light imaging, machine vision, backside illumination, stacked technology, target 
tracking (10 Lectures).  
233 
 
Color Processing: Color demosaicing, color correction and white balance (2 Lectures). 
Applications: Smart city, health care, autonomous vehicles, sports, motion detection, 
surveillance (2 Lectures). 
Textbook  
1. Jun Ohta, (2007), Smart CMOS Image sensors and Applications, CRC press. 
 
Self Learning Material  
1. O. Yadid Pecht and R. E. Cummings (2004), CMOS imagers: From Photo 
transduction to Image processing, Springer. 
2. Image sensors blog http://image-sensors-world.blogspot.com/  
 
Preparatory Course Material  
1. El Gamal, Abbas, and Helmy Eltoukhy (2005) "CMOS image sensors."  IEEE Circuits 
and Devices Magazine vol. 21, no. 3, pages 6-20.  
2. Fossum, Eric R. (1997) "CMOS image sensors: Electronic camera -on-a-chip." IEEE 
transactions on electron devices vol. 44. no. 10, pages 1689-1698.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
234 
 
Title Radio Frequency Integrated Circuit Design Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P 
[C] 
3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. (IV Year), M.Tech, and PhD Students Type Elective 
Prerequisite Analog electronics, Communication 
engineering, Microwave engineering. 
  
bjectives  
1. To introduce the students with the integrated circuit designing at radio frequencies.  
2. Introduction of various circuits and building blocks for communication applications. 
Learning Outcomes  
1. Understanding the design of integrated circuits at high frequencies. 
2. Practical implementation of various circuits required to build a transceiver system.  
3. Learning about the design of various active components like mixers, LNAs, power 
amplifiers at RF and microwave frequencies. 
Contents  
Communication System Overview: Modulation, Mobile Systems, Multiple Access 
Techniques, Wireless Standards. (3 lectures) 
Noise:  Noise spectrum, effect of transfer function on noise, noise in a circuit, device 
noise. (4 lectures) 
Transceiver Architectures: Heterodyne Receivers, Direct -Conversion Receivers, 
Image Reject and Low IF Receivers, Transmitter Architectures. (4 lectures) 
Concepts of RF Design: Wave Guides and Transmission Lines, coupled lines, S -
Parameters, Smith Chart, single and double stub impedance matching, Two -port gain 
and stability analysis. (10 lectures) 
Amplifier Design: Concepts of nonlinearity, time variance and IIP 3, model of MOS 
transistors and BJT at high frequencies, wideband amplifiers, constant gain amplifier, 
constant noise figure amplifier, power amplifiers, combining networks. (8 lectures)  
Oscillators and Voltage Controlled Oscillators:  Basic topologies VCO and definition 
of phase noise. Noise -power trade-off, quadrature and single -sideband generators. (5 
lectures) 
Mixers: Mixer Noise figure, port to port feed -through, single -balanced and double 
balanced mixers. (4 lectures) 
Introduction to Phase -Locked Loops: Type I and Type II PLL‟s , PLL Non -idealities. 
(4 lectures) 
Textbooks 
1. T. H. Lee, the Design of CMOS Radio -Frequency Integrated Circuits. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press, 1997. 
2. B. Razavi, RF Microelectronics, 2nd Edition, Pearson Education, 2014. 
3. G. Gonzalez, Microwave Transistor Amplifiers: Analysis and Design, 2 nd edition, 
Pearson, Aug-1996. 
 
Self Learning Materials  
 
1. RF Integrated Circuits, NPTEL, Dr. S. Chatterjee, IIT Delhi, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/117102012/# 
 
235 
 
2. High Speed Communication Circuits, MIT, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-
engineering-and-computer-science/6-776-high-speed-communication-circuits-
spring-2005/lecture-notes/ 
 
Preparatory Course Materials 
1. B. P. Lathi, Z. Ding, Modern Digital and Analog Communications Systems, 4 th 
edition, Oxford university press, July-2017. 
2. D. M. Pozar, Microwave Engineering, 4th edition, New York, NY, USA: Wiley, 2011.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
236 
 
 
Title VLSI Design Lab Number EEP7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 0–0–2 [1] 
Offered for M. Tech. 1st year Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
 
Objective 
1. To introduce students with the designing of combinational and sequential circuits.  
2. To familiarize students with the designing of various building blocks related to 
analog design.  
3. To familiarize students with the process design kits and tools like Cadence/Mentor 
Graphics. 
4. To aware the students with pre-layout and post-layout simulations. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Students will be able to understand the design issues and challenges involved in 
practical design. 
2. Knowledge of design tools like Cadence and process design kits. 
3. Students will be able to perform different analysis (DC, AC, transient etc. ) and 
design steps involved in tape-out. 
 
Contents 
• Experiments related to digital design 
 Design of static logic gates with passive and active load, plot voltage 
transfer characteristics and calculate noise margin. 
 Design and layout of switches including pass transistor and transmission 
gates. 
 Combinational circuit design with placement and routing considerations. 
 Implementation of different functions with dynamic and domino logic 
style. 
 Sequential logic design, clock issues and timing constraints. 
 
• Experiments related to analog design 
 Design of common source, common gate and common drain amplifier for 
given specifications. 
 Design problems related to wide swing, high gain, high bandwidth, low 
power and low noise differential amplifier. 
 Design of a differential amplifier with current-mirror/active load. 
 Design of a high speed, low power voltage mode and current mode 
comparators. 
 Design and perform DC, AC, noise, transient analysis of a two-stage op-
amp. 
 
 
 
  
237 
 
Title Sensors and IoT Lab Number EEP7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 0–0–2 [1] 
Offered for M. Tech. 1st year Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
 
Objective 
1. To introduce students with sensors fabrication 
2. To familiarize students with measurement instruments like Spectrum and Vector Network 
Analyzer 
3. To introduce students with various kits and components required for IoT applications 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Familiarization with sensor fabrication process and characterization 
2. Handling high frequency measurement instruments 
3. Implementation of various circuits required to build a transceiver 
 
Contents 
The lab course will be dependent on the  various core and elective components of the program. 
There will be a scope for modifying the contents depending on the recent developments in 
technology. Experiments from some of the following topics will be part of this lab.  
 
• Implementation of Signal Conditioning Circuits  
• Implementation of IoT components using Hardware/Software 
• Sensor interfacing using off-the-shelf components 
• Sensor Design, Fabrication and Characterization (Part of this in winter internship) 
• RF components characterization; Antennas and RF amplifiers 
• Implementation of real time examples of IoT using Embedded Systems 
• Selected experiments from Communication Systems 
• Recent topics of interest 
 
 
 
 
  
238 
 
Title Nano Sensors Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. (IV year), M.Tech, and Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objective 
The Instructor will: 
1. Make the students understand the importance of nanoscale materials for sensing 
applications. 
2. Explain the approaches used for characterizing sensors based nanomaterials. 
3. Teach the approaches used for tailoring nanomaterials for a specific sensing application.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
Students are expected to learn 
1. Identify the most appropriate Nanosensors for scientific applications.  
2. Understand the underlying sensing phenomena used in nanosensors;  
3. Reliably process, evaluate and interpret the information presented by nanosensors;  
 
Contents 
Nanomaterials and Properties: Nanoscale physics for quantum dot, nanowire and quantum 
wells; Properties of nanomaterials; nanomechanical oscillators, nano(bio)electronics, nanoscale 
heat transfer; fluids at nanoscale  (8 lectures)  
Nanoscale Characterization: Examination of nanoscale characterization approaches 
including imaging, scattering, and spectroscopic techniques and their physical operating 
mechanisms.  Microscopy (optical and electron: SEM, TEM); scattering & diffraction; 
spectroscopies (EDX, SIMS, Mass spec, Raman, XPS, XAS); scanning probe microscopes (SPM, 
AFM); particle size analysis (8 lectures) 
Nanofabrication: Basic engineering principles of nanofabrication. Topics include: photo-, 
electron beam and nanoimprint lithography, block of copolymers and self-assembled 
monolayers, colloidal assembly, biological nanofabrication (8 lectures) 
Nanosensors: Nanosensors based on metal nanoparticles, semi-conductor nanowires and 
nanocrystals and carbon nanotubes etc. (10 lectures) 
Case Studies of Nanosensors:  Optical, mechanical and chemical sensors based on 
nanomaterials, Hybrid nanomaterial-based sensors, Quantum wells based IR sensors (8 
lectures) 
 
 
 
239 
 
Text Books 
1. Mindy Adams, (2016) Engineered Nanomaterials: Modeling, Methodologies and 
Applications, Wellford Press 
2. John Hutchison, Angus Kirkland, (2007) Nano characterisation, RSC  
3. Roger George Jackson, (2004) Novel Sensors and Sensing, CRC Press  
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Research articles such as ACS Nano Letters, ACS Sensors, ACS Nano, Sensors & 
actuators B etc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
240 
 
Title Active Filter Design Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. (IV Year), M.Tech, and Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide theoretical and practical aspects of active filter design 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Design analog filters using active components. 
2.  Design customized filter for specific applications using approximation theory  
 
Contents  
Review of Network Theorems including Reciprocity and Tellegen‟s theorem, scattering 
parameters, properties of lossless passive networks. (4 Lectures) 
Butterworth approximation; Chebyshev approximation; synthesis of Butterworth  and 
Chebyshev filters; odd ve rsus even order filters; sensitivity of lossless LC  ladder filters  
Frequency transformations; inverse Chebyshev and elliptic  approximations; synthesis of 
inverse Chebyshev and elliptic filters; Darlington synthesis; signal flow graphs of ladder  filters. 
(20 Lectures) 
Opamp-RC implementation; Gm -C implementation; switched -capacitor implementation; 
minimum required p erformance of active components.  Tuning of  filters; transmission line 
based filters: using high -Z low -Z technique, using  Kuroda's identities; bi -quad based design 
approaches and drawbacks; Tow-Thomas biquad, Sallen-Key biquad. (18 Lectures) 
Textbook  
1. Schaumann, R., Xiao, H., Valkenburg, M.V., (2009), “Design of Analog Filters 2nd Edition” , 
2nd Edition, Oxford University Press 
2. Tsividis, Y.P., Voorman, J.O., (1993), “ Integrated Continuous -Time Filters: Principles ”, 
Design, and Applications, IEEE 
 
Preparatory Course Material  
1. Pavan, S., Active Filter Design , Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of 
Technology Madras, http://www.ee.iitm.ac.in/videolectures/doku.php?id=ee534:start  
   
241 
 
Title Millimeter-wave Technology Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. (IV Year), M.Tech, and PhD Students Type Elective 
Prerequisite Electromagnetic theory, Microwave engineering   
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1.  Introduce the students with the phenomenon and circuit characteristics at mm -wave 
frequency ranges. 
2.  Introduce various guiding structures, antennas, and switches at mm-wave frequencies 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Understand the design problems and challenges at mm-wave frequencies 
2.  design various mm-wave guiding structures, passive and active circuits 
 
Contents  
Introduction to millimeter -wave technology : mm-wave frequency bands, atmospheric 
losses, application of mm -waves, Propagation and path losses, Friis equation, link budget and 
power budget calculation. (4 lectures) 
Novel Guiding structures for mmwave circui ts: losses in planar circuits (conductor loss, 
leakage loss, dielectric loss, surface waves), Air filled waveguides, dielectric guides, NRD 
guide, substrate integrated waveguides (SIW), Substrate Integrated NRD (SINRD), Gap 
Waveguide, dielectric image line , planar air filled waveguide, Waveguide and planar 
resonators, Dielectric resonators, loaded, unloaded, and external Q -factors, SPST and SPDT 
switches. (8 lectures) 
Beam-forming network: Introduction to mmwave circuits: hybrid coupler, crossover, phase 
shifter, butler matrix, nolen matrix, Rotman lens. (5 lectures)  
Millimeter wave antennas: Problem with traditional antennas, horn antenna, dielectric rod 
antenna, Leaky wave antenna, waveguide slot array, chain antenna array, on chip antennas, 
monopulse rad ar network, transmitarray, reflectarray, millimeterwave over the air (OTA) 
measurement testing: Total Radiated Power (TRP), Total Isotropic Sensitivity (TIS), Effective 
Isotropic Radiated Power (EIRP), Effective Isotropic Sensitivity (EIS). (10 lectures) 
Packaging and interconnects: Challenges in packaging, design of interconnects at mm -
wave frequencies, bondwire interconnections, ball-grid array. (3 lectures) 
Millimeterwave Active circuits: mmwave CMOS circuits: LNA,  Oscillator, VCO , Power 
Amplifier, Frequency Synthesizer, SoC for mmwave RADAR, FinFET (10 Lectures) 
Case Studies: mmwave transciever for 5G, industrial radar sensor (2 lectures) 
 
242 
 
Textbook  
1. Koul S. K., (1997), Millimeter Wave and Optical Dielectric Integrated Guides and Circuits, 
Wiley-Blackwell 
2. Courtney D. Liu, B. Gaucher, U. Pfeiffer, and J. Grzyb,  (2009), Advanced millimeter wave 
technologies, Wiley. 
3. Hueber, G., & Niknejad, A. (Eds.). (2019). Millimete r-Wave Circuits for 5G and Radar (The 
Cambridge RF and Microwave Engineering Series). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.  
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Mandal M. K., Millimeter -wave technology, NPTEL course material, Department of 
Electronics and Electrical Communication Engineering, IIT Kharagpur,  
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117105139/   
2. TI Train ing & Vedios, (2017), mmWave RADAR in ADAS Applications, 
https://training.ti.com/mmwave-radar-adas-applications      
Preparatory Course Material 
1. D. M. Pozar, (2011), Microwave Engineering, 4th Ed. New York, NY, USA: Wiley   
 
 
  
243 
 
 Title Selected Topics In Sensors and IoT I Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 
Offered for M.Tech., PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite Fundamentals of sensors   
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Expose the students to the latest upcoming fields in the area of sensors and IoT 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply the knowledge of recent topics  in the field of sensors and IoT  to specific areas of 
research  
 
Contents  
The topic clouds for the course include some contemporary topics in sensors and IoT  (but not 
restricted to) like Nanosensors, MEMS/NEMS sensors, biosensors modeling and design, 
industrial IoT. The topics may be further updated according to the instructor. 
 
Textbook  
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
 
  
244 
 
 
Title Selected Topics In Sensors and IoT II Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 
Offered for M.Tech., PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite Fundamentals of sensors   
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Expose the students to the latest upcoming fields in the area of sensors and IoT 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply the knowledge of recent topics   in the field of sensors and IoT  to specific areas of 
research  
 
Contents  
The topic clouds for the course include some contemporary topics in sensors and IoT  (but not 
restricted to) like Nanosensors, MEMS/NEMS sensors, biosensors modeling and design, 
industrial IoT. The topics may be further updated according to the instructor. 
 
Textbook  
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
  
245 
 
 
Title Selected Topics In Sensors and IoT III Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech., PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite Fundamentals of sensors   
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Expose the students to the latest upcoming fields in the area of sensors and IoT 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply the knowledge of recent topics   in the field of sensors and IoT  to specific areas of 
research  
 
Contents  
The topic clouds for the course include some contemporary topics in sensors and IoT  (but not 
restricted to) like Nanosensors, MEMS/NEMS sensors, biosensors modeling and design, 
industrial IoT. The topics may be further updated according to the instructor. 
 
Textbook  
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
 
 
 
 
246 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
M. Tech. – Ph. D. Dual Degree 
 
in 
 
Communications and Signal Processing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
247 
 
Introduction 
During the past few years, there has been an exponential growth in the usage of internet. The fast 
development of economy and society requires modern and high -performance communications 
systems that can cater for massive deployment of Internet of Things, while still offering acceptable 
levels of energy consumption, equipment cost and network deployment and operation cost. It 
needs to support a wide variety of applications and services requiring i ncreased spectral efficiency, 
higher data rates, low latency and high reliability. Communications and Signal processing is one of 
the key technologies to meet the growing connectivity requirements for new use cases (e.g. for 
ultra-low latency or high relia bility cases) and new applications for the industry, opening up new 
revenue streams also for operators. The M. Tech. -Ph. D. Dual Degree programme in 
Communications and Signal Processing prepares students for an advanced engineering career by 
in-depth under standing of modern communication networks on all layers and their associated 
signal processing methods. The program provides students an opportunity to learn the 
specialization in depth by updating and renewing their technical knowledge in a rapidly changi ng 
telecommunication industry. 
 
Objective of the Program 
Graduates from the program will have in -depth knowledge and critical awareness of theoretical and 
practical solutions to problems at the forefront of communications and the processing of signals. 
They would be ready for careers in fields such as development, research, operations and 
management of next-generation telecommunication networks and information processing systems. 
 
Graduate attributes 
 The graduates of this program will have strong fundamentals in modern communications 
technology and signal processing methods. 
 Understanding of cutting-edge research on future generations of wireless communication.  
 Analytical and experimental skills required to design and implement next -generation 
communication systems for various applications like Internet-of-Things, smart health, Smart 
City, Intelligent Transportation Systems 
 Ability to do critical and creative thinking, and to conduct independent and original research 
and scholarship 
 Ability to appl y existing skills and knowledge to identify and formulate new problems, 
produce new ideas, approaches or actions 
 Ability to teach and express ideas in both written and oral formats 
 
Learning outcome 
• Ability to statistically characterize and evaluate the performance of communication systems. 
• Ability to apply the different methods for signal detection and estimation to real world 
engineering problems and advanced research 
• Develop understanding of cutting -edge research on future generations of wireless 
communication.   
• Analyze multi -user networks and understanding of techniques like opportunistic 
communication, multiuser diversity, superposition coding and successive interference 
cancellation 
• Implement end-to-end wireless communication systems with various MIMO technologies like 
maximal ratio combining, OFDM, interleaving/de-interleaving, and Alamouti codes 
• Ability to  
• Master a specific set of methods appropriate to their dissertation, with the depth needed to 
produce methodologically rigorous research. 
• Carry out research work demonstrating scientific problem solving and generate IPR 
 
248 
 
Program’s Structure 
Overall Structure (M. Tech. Degree Requirements for Communications and Signal Processing) 
 
Category M. Tech. 
Compulsory (MC) 
M. Tech.  Elective (ME) M. Tech. Open 
(MO) 
M. Tech. 
Project 
(MP) 
Total Graded 
Credits 17 17 6 16 56 
 
Semester wise distribution of credits 
Cat. Course Title L-T-P Credits  Cat. Course Title L-T-P Credits 
I Semester  II Semester 
MC Statistical Signal Analysis  3-0-0 3  MC Data Communication and 
Networking  
3-0-0 3 
MC Wireless Communications 3-0-0 3  MC MIMO Wireless Communications 3-0-0 3 
MC Advanced Digital Signal Processing 3-0-0 3  ME Program Elective-2 3-0-0 3 
MC Digital Signal Processing  Lab 0-0-2 1  ME Program Elective-3 3-0-0 3 
MC Communications Engineering Lab 0-0-2 1  ME Program Elective Lab 1-0-2 2 
ME Program Elective-1 3-0-0 3  NG Innovation and IP Management  1-0-0 1 
NG Technical Communication 1-0-0 1      
Total (Graded + Non-graded) 15  Total (Graded + Non-graded) 15 
III Semester  IV Semester 
MP Project-1 0-0-10 5  MP Project-2 0-0-22 11 
ME Program Elective-4 3-0-0 3  MO Open Elective-2 3-0-0 3 
ME Program Elective-5 3-0-0 3  NG Professional Ethics 1-0-0 1 
MO Open Elective-1 3-0-0 3      
NG Systems Engineering and Project 
Management 
1-0-0 1      
Total (Graded+ Non-graded) 15  Total (Graded + Non-graded) 15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
249 
 
Topic Clouds 
 
Semester I 
Statistical Signal 
Analysis 
Wireless 
Communications 
Advanced Digital 
Signal Processing 
Digital Signal 
Processing Lab 
Communications 
Engineering Lab 
 Random Processes 
 Stationarity and 
Ergodicity 
 Random parameter 
estimation 
 Non-random 
parameter 
estimation 
 Multiple parameter 
estimation 
 Fading channel 
models 
 Error performance 
in AWGN and fading 
channels 
 Diversity 
Techniques 
 Capacity of fading 
channels 
 Multiuser systems - 
multiple and 
random access 
techniques 
 Multiuser diversity 
 Ad-Hoc Networks 
 
 Review of Fourier 
Analysis 
 Short time Fourier 
Transform 
 Resolution 
concepts 
 Wavelet 
Transform 
 Multi rate 
systems 
 Finite word length 
effects 
 Digital signal 
processor 
architecture 
 Interface hardware 
and software 
systems 
 Comparative study 
of microprocessor, 
ASIC and DSP 
 Implementation of 
ADC, convolution, 
FIR, IIR, FFT and 
spectral estimation 
techniques 
 
 Introduction to  
instruments like 
vector signal 
analyzer, spectrum 
analyzer 
 Implementation of 
end-to-end 
communication 
systems 
 Implementation of 
Equalizers 
 Implementation of 
Alamouti codes 
 
 
Semester II 
MIMO Wireless Communications Data Communication and Networking 
 MIMO channel models 
 Receiver architectures 
 Diversity multiplexing gain tradeoff 
 Space-time code design 
 Multiuser MIMO 
 Massive MIMO 
 Fundamentals of Data Communication 
 Network layer and topology design 
 Network Management 
 Mechanisms to improve performance 
 Transport and Application Layers 
 Reliability and security 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
250 
 
Complete List of Program Electives 
 
Course Title L-T-P Credits  Course Title L-T-P Credits 
Coding Theory 3-0-0 3  Free Space Optical Communications 3-0-0 3 
Antenna Engineering 3-0-0 3  GNSS Signal Processing 3-0-0 3 
Advanced Digital Communication 3-0-0 3  Backhaul Networks for Wireless 
Systems 
3-0-0 3 
Network Information Theory 3-0-0 3  Selected Topics in Communication I 1-0-0 1 
Statistical Decision Theory 2-0-0 2  Selected Topics in Communication II 2-0-0 2 
Multi-rate Digital Signal Processing  2-0-0 2  Selected Topics in Communication III 3-0-0 3 
Digital Image Processing and 
Applications 
3-0-0 3  Neuromorphic computing and design 3-0-0 3 
Digital  Video Processing 3-0-0 3  Machine Learning 2 3-0-0 3 
RF IC Design 3-0-0 3  Real Time Communications 3-0-0 3 
Adaptive Signal Processing 3-0-0 3  Millimeter Wave Technology (SM) 3-0-0 3 
Optical Fiber Communications 3-0-0 3  Digital Image and Video Processing Lab 1-0-2 2 
Image sensor Design and Application 3-0-0 3  RF IC Design Lab 1-0-2 2 
Applied Optimization for Wireless 
Communication 
3-0-0 3  Network Information Theory 3-0-0 3 
Machine Learning for Communications  3-0-0 3  Graph Theory 3-0-0 3 
Machine Learning 1 3-0-0 3  Matrix Computations 1-0-0 1 
Optimization 1-0-0 1  Wavelets 3-0-0 3 
Physical Layer Security 3-0-0 3  Computational Imaging  3-0-0 3 
Compressive Sensing  3-0-0 3  Speech and Audio Processing  3-0-0 3 
Bio-Image Computing 3-0-0 3  Selected Topics in Signal Processing II 2-0-0 2 
Selected Topics in Signal Processing I 1-0-0 1  Data Compression  3-0-0 3 
Selected Topics in Signal Processing III 3-0-0 3  Machine Learning for Communication 
Lab 
1-0-2 2 
Multimedia Communications 3-0-0 3     
Note: Machine Learning 1 and 2, Bio -Image Computing, and Neuromorphic computing and design 
will be offered by CSE, while Graph Theory, Matrix Computations, and Optimization will be offered 
by Mathematics Department. The course contents are available in the respective booklets. 
 
251 
 
Advisory for Program Electives 
 
Course Title L-T-P Credits  Course Title L-T-P Credits 
Program Elective -1    Program Elective Lab   
Coding Theory 3-0-0 3  Digital image and Video Processing Lab 1-0-2 2 
Antenna Engineering 3-0-0 3  RF IC Design Lab 1-0-2 2 
Machine Learning 1 3-0-0 3  Machine Learning for Communication 
Lab 
1-0-2 2 
Advanced Digital Communication 3-0-0 3     
Selected Topics in Communication I  1-0-0 1     
Selected Topics in Communication II 2-0-0 2     
Selected Topics in Communication III 3-0-0 3  Program Elective -4,5   
Matrix Computations 1-0-0 1  Free Space Optical Communications 3-0-0 3 
Optimization 1-0-0 1  GNSS Signal Processing 3-0-0 3 
    Millimeter Wave Technology 3-0-0 3 
Program Elective -2,3    Selected Topics in Communication I  1-0-0 1 
Statistical Decision Theory 2-0-0 2  Selected Topics in Communication II 2-0-0 2 
Optimal Filtering 3-0-0 3  Selected Topics in Communication III 3-0-0 3 
Digital Video Processing 3-0-0 3  Neuromorphic computing and design 3-0-0 3 
Digital Image Processing and 
Applications 
3-0-0 3  Machine Learning for Communications 3-0-0 3 
Selected Topics in Communication I  1-0-0 1  Real Time Communications 3-0-0 3 
Selected Topics in Communication II 2-0-0 2  Backhaul Networks for Wireless 
Systems 
3-0-0 3 
Selected Topics in Communication III 3-0-0 3  Computational Imaging 3-0-0 3 
Multi-rate Digital Signal Processing 2-0-0 2  Wavelets 3-0-0 3 
RF IC Design 3-0-0 3  Speech and Audio Signal  Processing 3-0-0 3 
Graph Theory 3-0-0 3  Selected Topics in Signal Processing I  1-0-0 1 
Adaptive Signal Processing 3-0-0 3  Selected Topics in Signal Processing II 2-0-0 2 
Optical Fiber Communications 3-0-0 3  Selected Topics in Signal Processing III 3-0-0 3 
Image sensor Design and Application 3-0-0 3     
Applied Optimization for Wireless 3-0-0 3     
252 
 
Communication 
Data Compression 3-0-0 3     
Machine Learning 2 3-0-0 3     
Network Information Theory 3-0-0 3     
Physical Layer Security 3-0-0 3     
Compressive Sensing  3-0-0 3     
Bio-Image Computing 3-0-0 3     
Selected Topics in Signal Processing I  1-0-0 1     
Selected Topics in Signal Processing II 2-0-0 2     
Selected Topics in Signal Processing III 3-0-0 3     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
253 
 
Detailed Course Contents 
 
Title Statistical Signal Analysis 
 
Number EEL7XX0 
 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech-Ph.D. Dual Degree (Comm. Engg.)  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Knowledge of Probability Theory and Fundamentals of 
Communications 
  
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide background to understand different types of random processes 
2.  Introduce the different methods of parameter estimation 
 
Learning Outcomes  
     The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply the knowledge of random processes for statistical characterization of communication 
systems  
2. Apply the different methods for signal estimation to real world engineering problems and 
advanced research 
 
Contents  
 (fractal 1) EEL7XX1 Characterization of Random processes: stationarity, mean, 
correlation, and covariance functions, WSS random process, autocorrelation and cross-
correlation functions, transmission of a random process through a linear filter, power spectral 
density, white random process, Gaussian process, Poisson process (14 Lectures) 
  
 (fractal 2) EEL7XX2 Estimation Theory : Random parameter estimation: risk function, 
MMSE estimators, MAP estimators  (6 Lectures) 
Non-random parameter estimation: CRLB for non -random parameters, ML estimation rule, 
asymptotic properties of ML estimates, linear minimum variance estimation, condition for 
statistical efficiency (8 Lectures) 
 
(fractal 3) EEL7XX3 Multiple Parameter Estimation : estimation procedure, measures of 
error, properties and bounds on estimation errors for random and non -random parameters 
(14 Lectures) 
 
254 
 
Textbook  
1. Papoulis, A. and Pillai, U. S., (2002), Probability, Random Variables, and Stochastic 
Processes, 4th Edition, Tata Mc-Graw Hill 
2. Van Trees, H. L., (2003), Detection, Estimation and Modulation Theory: Part -1, 2nd Edition, 
John Wiley  
3. Kay, S.M., (1998), Fundamentals of Statistical Signal Processing: Vol. 1 Estimation Theory , 
1st Edition, Prentice Hall  
 
Self-Learning Material 
1. Sinha, R., Signal Detection and Estimation Theory, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117103018/ 
  
Preparatory Course Material 
1. Thangraj, A., Probability Foundations for Electrical Engineers , NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117103018/ 
 
 
  
255 
 
 
Title Wireless Communications Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.-Ph.D. Dual Degree (Comm. Engg.)  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Fundamentals of Communications   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide students an understanding of the concepts related to communication over wireless 
fading channel. 
2.  Expose students to concepts and techniques for exploiting fading and application of these 
concepts in multiuser communication systems context. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Understand concepts related to deep fade, diversity techniques and channel capacity for 
point-to-point wireless communications systems. 
2. Analyze multi -user networks and understanding of techniques like opportunistic 
communication, multiuser dive rsity, superposition coding and successive interference 
cancellation. 
3.  Analyze and design wireless ad -hoc networks with special emphasis on energy constrained 
networks 
 
Contents  
Wireless Channels : Modelling of wireless channels; space, time and frequency channel 
coherence; input/output channel models for single and multi-antenna systems (7 lectures) 
Diversity: Digital modulation and its performance in fading; inter -symbol interference; realizing 
diversity: time diversity, frequency diversity, ant enna diversity; code design for wireless 
channels (14 lectures) 
Wireless Channel Capacity : Capacity of the Gaussian channels; capacity of fading channels (7 
lectures) 
Multiuser system design : Multiple access and random access techniques; multiuser channel 
capacity (7 lectures) 
Ad hoc wireless network : design principles, protocol layers, network capacity limits, and 
energy-constrained networks. (7 lectures) 
 
256 
 
Textbook  
1. Tse, D. and Viswanath, P., (2005), Fundamentals of wireless communication , Cambridge 
University Press. 
2.  Goldsmith, A., (2005), Wireless Communications, Cambridge University Press. 
3.  Simon, M. K. and Alouini, M. S., (2004), Digital communication over fading channels , John 
Wiley and Sons. 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Zheng, L., Principle s of Wireless Communications, MIT OpenCourseWare, Electrical 
Engineering & Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-452-principles-
of-wireless-communications-spring-2006/index.htm 
     
Preparatory Course Material  
1. Jagannatham, A. K., Principles of Communication II , NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Electrical Engineering,       Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108104098/  
2. Zheng, L. and Gallager, R., Principles of Digital Communications I , MIT OpenCourseWare, 
Electrical Engineering & Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-450-principles-of-
digital-communications-i-fall-2006/ 
 
 
  
257 
 
 
Title Advanced Digital Signal Processing Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech., M.Tech., Ph.D. Type Core 
Prerequisite Signals and Systems   
 
Objectives 
     The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide students an understanding of analysis and synthesis of algorithms and systems that 
process discrete time signals, with emphasis on realization and implementation  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Interpret and process discrete/digital signal and systems 
2.  Analyze and provide solutions to practical implementation issues of DSP systems 
 
Contents  
Review of Fourier analysis Discrete time systems, DTFT, Z-transform, Analysis of LSI systems, 
DFT and FFT (9 lectures) 
Time-frequency representation; frequency scale and resolution; uncertainty principle, short-
time Fourier transform (5 lectures) 
Multi-resolution concept and analysis, Wavelet transforms (CWT, DWT) (4 lectures) 
Families of wavelets: Orthogonal and bi orthogonal wavelets Daubechies‟ family of orthogonal 
wavelets, elements of multi-rate systems and two band filter bank design for dyadic wavelets 
(10 lectures) 
Multirate systems: sampling rate conversion, implementation of Multirate systems, filter design 
for Multirate systems, two channel filter banks and multi-channel filter banks. (5 lectures) 
Finite wordlength effects: Number representation, statistical analysis of quantization error, 
quantization of Fixed-point and Floating point numbers, A/D and D/A conversion, A/D 
conversion noise analysis, quantization of filter coefficients, Effects of finite wordlength on 
digital filters. (6 lectures) 
Applications of ADSP (3 lectures) 
 
 
 
258 
 
Textbook 
1. Proakis, J. G. and Manolakis,  D.G., (2007), Digital Signal Processing , 4th Edition, Prentice 
Hall  
2. Mitra, S. K., (2008), Digital Signal Processing, 3nd Edition, McGraw Hill  
3. Manolakis, D.G., and Ingle, V., (2011), Applied Digital Signal Processing, 1st Edition, 
Cambridge University Press 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Basu, T. K., Digital Signal Processing , NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108105055/  
 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. Jagannatham, A. K., Principles of Signals and Systems , NPTEL Course Material, Department 
of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108104100/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
259 
 
Title Digital Signal Processing Lab Number EEP7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 0–0–2 [1] 
Offered for M.Tech. - Ph.D. Dual Degree (Comm. Engg.)  Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Help design and implement a DSP system using DSP kits. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Implement algorithms on DSP kits. 
2.  Make choice of specific DSP architecture for given application. 
 
Contents  
 
An introduction to  Digital Signal Processors and the associated interface hardware and 
software systems 
Basic exercises in programming Digital Signal Processors, signal generation, processing 
and file I/O 
The Joint “systems – algorithms – architectures” perspective as a hol istic approach in 
Signal Processing applications 
Comparative studies between general purpose microprocessors/computing devices and 
specialized application specific integrated circuits (ASICs) and digital signal 
processors. 
Study and implementation of Analo g to Digital Conversion, sampling and 
reconstruction, simple Discrete Time Systems, Finite Impulse Response Filters, and 
Infinite Impulse Response Filters. 
Fast Fourier Transforms and Spectral Estimation – Algorithms, Implementation. 
Realization and implem entation of computationally efficient Digital Signal Processing 
structures like the lattice structure, ladder structure. 
 
Textbook  
1. Venkataramani, B., and Bhaskar, M., (2011), Digital Signal Processors: Architecture, 
Programming and Applications, 2nd Edition, Tata McGraw Hill  
 
260 
 
2. Proakis, J. G., and Manolakis, D. G., (1997), Digital Signal Processing – Principles, 
Algorithms and Applications, 3rd Edition, Prentice Hall of India  
 
3. Udayashankara, V., (2010), Real Time Digital Signal Processing, Fundamenta ls, 
Algorithms and Implementation Using TMS Processor, Prentice Hall India 
 
Self-Learning Material 
1. Manuals for DSP Kits and MATLAB literature on Mathworks website 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Jagannatham, A. K., Principles of Signals and Systems , NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108104100/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
261 
 
Title Communications Engineering Lab Number EEP7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 0–0–2 [1] 
Offered for M.Tech.-Ph.D. Dual Degree (Comm. Engg.) Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Fundamentals of Communications   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Familiarize students with the baseband generation software tools and the 
measurement instruments. 
2.  Expose students to end-to-end implementation of wireless communication systems. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Design, test and evaluate communication systems. 
2.  Implement end -to-end wireless communication systems with various MIMO 
technologies like maximal ratio combining, OFDM, interleaving/de -interleaving, and 
Alamouti codes. 
 
Contents  
An introduction to measurement equipment like Signal Analyzer, AFG, Oscilloscope.  
Study and implementation  of end-to-end single antenna communication system with - 
Continuous Wave Carrier, I -Q modulation with coherent and non -coherent signaling, 
BPSK modulation with channel coding techniques. 
Implementation and demonstration of effect of channel fading in wire less 
communication systems 
Study and implementation of various MIMO receiver architectures, diversity techniques 
(Time (Linear Block Codes with interleaving/de -interleaving), frequency (coded OFDM) 
and antenna diversity (Alamouti code). 
 
Textbook  
1. Tse, D. and Viswanath, P., (2005), Fundamentals of wireless communication , 
Cambridge University Press. 
2.  Goldsmith, A., (2005), Wireless Communications, Cambridge University Press. 
3.  Simon, M. K. and Alouini, M. S., (2004), Digital communication over fading  
channels, John Wiley and Sons. 
262 
 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. User manual for Signal Analyzer, AFG, and Oscilloscope. 
Preparatory Course Material  
1. Zheng, L. and Gallager, R., Principles of Digital Communications I , MIT 
OpenCourseWare,  Electrical Engineering & Computer Scie nce, Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical -engineering-and-computer-
science/6-450-principles-of-digital-communications-i-fall-2006/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
263 
 
Title Data Communication and Networking Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech (IV Year), M. Tech., PhD. Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Fundamentals of Wireless Communications   
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1.  Expose the students to distinguishing features of wireless networks 
 
Learning Outcomes  
     The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Design and optimize wireless network architectures. 
2. Implement security techniques for wireless networks. 
 
Contents  
Fundamentals: Layered architecture overview, data communication techniques, 
motivations for cross -layer protocol design, motivations for performance analysis, 
forward error correction and re-transmission performances (7 Lectures) 
Network layer and topology design: Markov and semi -Markov processes, Little‟s 
theorem, M/M/m/k, M/G/1 systems, priority queueing, network of queues, network 
traffic behavior, routing algorithms and analysis , distributed networks, design 
constraints, bounded latency networks, optimization, cognitive networks (10 Lectures) 
Network Management: Power management, time synchronization, localization, energy -
efficient protocols for sensor networks (7 Lectures) 
Mechanisms to improve performance : Self -Organizing Network, Software -Defined 
Networking (7 Lectures) 
Transport and Application Layers: congestion control and quality of service, scheduling , 
multimedia, key aspects and design issues (7 Lectures) 
Reliability and  security: Security requirement and attacks, Encryption techniques, 
reliable and secure communication protocols (4 Lectures) 
 
Textbook 
1. Dargie, W., and Poellabauer, C., (2010), Fundamentals of  
Wireless Sensor Networks: Theory and Practice, Wiley 
2. Stallings, W., (2007), Data and Computer Communications, 8th Edition, Pearson 
3. Bertsekas, D. P. and Gallager, R. G., (1992), Data Networks, 2nd Edition, Prentice 
Hall 
 
 
264 
 
Self-Learning Material 
4. Mishra, S., Wireless Adhoc and Sensors Networks , NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Electrical and Electronics Communication Engineering, Ind ian 
Institute of Technology Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106105160/ 
5. Zou, Y., Zhu, J., Wang, X., and Hanzo, L., "A Survey on Wireless Security: Technical 
Challenges, Recent Advances, and Future Trends," in Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 
104, no. 9, pp. 1727-1765, Sept. 2016. 
6. W. Xia, Y. Wen, C. H. Foh, D. Niyato and H. Xie, "A Survey on Software -Defined 
Networking," in IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 27-51, 
First quarter 2015. 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
2. Zheng, L., Princ iples of Wireless Communications, MIT OpenCourseWare, Electrical 
Engineering & Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-452-
principles-of-wireless-communications-spring-2006/index.htm 
 
 
 
  
265 
 
Title MIMO Wireless Communications Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.-Ph.D. Dual Degree (Comm. Engg.) Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Wireless Communications   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide exposure to the fundamental concepts and techniques of multiple -input 
multiple-output (MIMO) communications over wireless communication channels. 
2. Expose students to the massive MIMO theory that gives rise to improved reliability 
and increased data rates. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Understand the concepts and mathematical tools related to MIMO architecture like 
V-BLAST, D-BLAST, beamforming and diversity multiplexing gain tradeoff. 
2.  Analyze, design, and simulate MIMO communication systems with a special 
emphasis on space-time codes and signaling techniques for massive MIMO. 
 
Contents  
Channel Modeling and Spatial Multiplexing : Multiplexing Capability of Deterministic 
MIMO Channels, Physical Modeling of MIMO Channels, Modeling of MIMO Fading 
Channels (7 Lectures) 
Capacity and Multiplexing Architectures : The V -BLAST Architecture, Fast Fading MIMO 
Channel, Receiver Architectures, Slow Fading MIMO Channel, D -BLAST: An Outage -
Optimal Architecture (7 Lectures) 
Diversity-Multiplexing Tradeoff and Space -Time Codes: Diversity-Multiplexing Tradeoff, 
Space-time Code Design for Optimal Diversity-Multiplexing Tradeoff (7 Lectures) 
MIMO Multiuser Communication : Uplink with Multiple Recei ve Antennas, MIMO Uplink, 
Downlink with Multiple Transmit Antennas, MIMO Downlink, Multiple Antennas in 
Cellular Networks: A System View (9 Lectures) 
Massive MIMO networks : Large MIMO systems - Channel hardening and favorable 
propagation, channel estimation, precoding in large MIMO systems (12 Lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Tse, D. and Viswanath, P., (2005), Fundamentals of wireless communication , 
Cambridge University Press. 
266 
 
2.  Chockalingam A. and Rajan B. S., (2014), Large MIMO Systems , Cambridge 
University Press. 
3.  Biglieri E., Calderbank R., Constantinides A., Paulraj A. and Poor H. V., (2007), 
MIMO Wireless Communications, Cambridge University Press. 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Zheng K.,  Zhao L., Mei J., Shao B., Xiang W. and Hanzo L., "Survey of Large-Scale 
MIMO Systems," in IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 
1738-1760, 2015. 
2. Wu Y., Xiao C., Ding Z., Gao X. and Jin S., "A Survey on MIMO Transmission With 
Finite Input Signals: Technical Challenges, Advances, and Future Trends," in 
Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 106, no. 10, pp. 1779-1833, Oct. 2018. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
267 
 
Details of Elective Courses 
 
Title Coding Theory Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. IV Year, M. Tech., Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Knowledge of Probability Theory and  Fundamentals of 
Communications 
  
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide an introduction to different types of channel codes. 
2. Familiarize students with the fundamentals of error detection and correction.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Design channel codes for error detection and correction. 
2. Analyze and compare the performance of uncoded and coded communication systems. 
 
Contents  
Introduction: Review of information theory, motivation for channel coding (3 Lectures) 
Introduction to Linear Algebra: Introduction to finite fields, field arithmetic, vector spaces  (4 
Lectures) 
Linear Block Codes: Properties of LBCs, some specific LBCs (Repetition codes, Hamming codes, 
LDPC codes), soft decision decoding of LBCs, Hard decision decoding of LBCs, Bounds on 
minimum distance of LBCs (7 Lectures) 
Cyclic Codes: Definition and properties, polynomial repres entation, encoding and decoding of 
cyclic codes, burst error correction (7 Lectures) 
BCH and RS codes: Introduction to BCH Codes: Generator Polynomials, Multiple Error 
Correcting BCH Codes, Decoding of BCH Codes, Introduction to RS codes, Decoding RS 
codes (7 Lectures) 
Convolutional Codes: Structure of convolutional codes, decoding of convolutional codes, 
distance bounds for convolutional codes, punctured convolutional codes (7 Lectures) 
Trellis coded modulation : Introduction to TCM, Ungerboeck‟s TCM design  rules, TCM decoder, 
performance evaluation of TCM schemes (7 Lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Lin, S. and Costello, D. J., (2004), Error Control Coding, 2nd Edition, Prentice Hall 
2. Proakis, J. G. and Salehi, M., (2007), Digital Communications, 5th Edition, McGraw-Hill 
3. Bose, R., (2017), Information Theory, Coding and Cryptography, 3rd Edition, McGraw-Hill 
268 
 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Thangraj, A., Coding Theory, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical Engineering, 
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117106031/  
 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. Jagannatham, A. K., Principles of Communication II , Department of Electrical Engineering, 
Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108104098/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
269 
 
 
Title 
Antenna Engineering Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. IV Year, M. Tech., Ph.D.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite Electromagnetic Theory   
 
Objectives  
    The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce the various concept of antenna design. 
2. familiarize the students with the application of different type of antennas 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Design low profile antennas and high gain antenna arrays for practical applications 
2. Utilize simulation software for designing Antenna systems and test RF and 
microwave antennas 
 
Contents  
Introduction to Antennas : Radiation mechanism, Current distribution on a thin wire 
antenna, Review of Antenna Parameters; Friis Transmission formulae, Radar Range 
equation (7 Lectures) 
Radiation Integrals and Auxiliary Potential Function Vector potential for electric current 
source and magnetic current source, inhomogeneous vector potential wave equation, 
duality theorem, reciprocity theorem (3 Lectures) 
Design of Dipole Antenna Design of Infinitesimal dipole, small dipole, half -wavelength 
dipole (4 Lectures) 
Microstrip antenna Rectangular patch antenna, feeding methods, transmission line 
model, cavity model, Circular Patch Antenna  (4 Lectures) 
Low-profile Antenna Application : Mobile handset antenna - helical wire and variants; 
electrically small antenna; power factor, quality factor and bandwidth; radiation 
efficiency and realized gain;  PIFA; On -chip antenna;  SAR measurement and 
miniaturization; GPS and Bluetooth antenna; medical application - antennas for medical 
imaging; heating; sensing; Automobile antennas - MAST antenna; Window glass 
antenna; Panel Antenna; (10 Lectures) 
Design of Antenna Arrays Analysis of Two element array, N -element linear array 
(uniform and nonuniform amplitude excitation: Binomial, Dolph -Tschebyscheff, Taylor 
distribution), planar array, Phased Array  (5 Lectures) 
Aperture Antenna Field equivalence principle, Radiation equation, Rectangular aperture, 
circular aperture, Babinet‟s principle, Sectoral horn antenna, Pyramidal Horn antenna  
270 
 
(6 Lectures) 
Antenna Measurement Antenna Ranges, Radiation Pattern measurement, Gain 
measurement (absolute gain method, gain comparison method), Directivity 
measurement  (3 Lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Balanis  C. A., (2016), Antenna Theory,  Analysis and Design , 4 th edition, Wiley 
Press 
2. Krauss  J. D., (2006), Antennas and Wave Propagation, 4th edition, TMH Education 
3.  Elliott  R. S., (2006), Antenna Theory and Design, Wiley Press 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Kumar, G., Antennas, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical Engineering, 
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay,   
https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc17_ee03/preview  
2.Ferraro, A., Antenna Engineering , Video Lec tures, Penn State Univ., USA, 
http://www.engr.psu.edu/cde/courses/ee438/index.htm 
 
Preparatory Course Material  
1. Kumar, P., Electromagnetic Theory, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108104087/  
2.  Kumar, G.,  Microwave Theory and Techniques,  Department of Electrical 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108101112/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
271 
 
Title Advanced Digital Communication Number EEL5XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. IV Year, M. Tech., Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Knowledge of Probability Theory and  
Fundaments of Communications 
  
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide strong theoretical foundation of digital communication modulation schemes 
and performance evaluation. 
2. Familiarize students with the fundamentals of communication through band limited 
channels and synchronization. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Design receivers for optimum performance. 
2. Analyze communication systems for their bit error performance.   
 
Contents  
Introduction: Complex baseband representation of signals, Gram -Schmidt 
orthogonalization procedure, M -ary orthogonal signals, bi -orthogonal signals, 
simplex signal waveforms (4 Lectures) 
Digital Modulation Schemes : Memoryless modulation schemes, signaling schemes with 
memory, power spectral density of digitally modulated signals (10 Lectures) 
Optimum receivers for AWGN channels: Coherent and non -coherent demodulation: 
Matched filter, Correlator demodulator, square -law, and envelope detection; 
Detector: Optimum rule for ML and MAP detection Performance: Bi t-error-rate, 
symbol error rate for coherent and non-coherent schemes (14 Lectures) 
Carrier and Symbol Synchronization: carrier recovery and symbol synchronization in 
demodulation, carrier phase estimation, symbol timing estimation (4 Lectures) 
Digital Com munication through Band Limited channels: signal design through band 
limited channels, Optimum receiver for channel with ISI and AWGN, Linear 
equalization, Decision -feedback equalization (10 Lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Proakis, J. G. and Salehi, M., (2007), Digital Communications, 5th Edition, McGraw-
Hill 
2. Madhow, U., (2008), Fundamentals of Digital Communication, 1st Edition, Cambridge 
University Press 
3. Barry, J. R., Lee, E. A., and Messerschmitt, D. G., (2004), Digital Communications, 
3rd Edition, Springer 
272 
 
 
Preparatory Course Material  
1. Jagannatham, A. K., Principles of Communication II , Department of Electrical 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108104098/ 
 
 
 
 
 
  
273 
 
Title Statistical Decision Theory  Number EEP7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 
Offered for B.Tech. IV Year, M. Tech., Ph.D. Type Elective   
Prerequisite Knowledge of Probability Theory and 
Fundamentals of Communications 
  
 
Objectives  
     The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide background to understand the fundamental aspects of decision making and 
hypothesis testing that are essential for communication receiver design 
 
Learning Outcomes  
     The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Apply the different methods for signal detection to real world engineering problems 
and advanced research 
2.  Garner useful insights into performance evaluation of communication systems 
 
Contents  
Introduction: structure of detection theory problems (1 Lecture) 
Simple Binary Hypothesis Testing: decision criteria, Maximum Likelihood criterion, 
Neyman-Pearson criterion, Bayes risk, probability of error and min -max criterion, 
receiver operating characteristics, composite hypothesis testing (6 Lectures) 
M-ary Hypotheses or Multiple Decision Theory: multiple decisions, Bayes risk, 
probability of error, general Gaussian problem, performance bounds and 
approximations (14 Lectures) 
Detection of Contin uous Time Signals: detection of signals in additive white Gaussian 
noise, detection in colored noise, signals with unwanted parameters (random phase, 
random amplitude and phase) (7 Lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Van Trees, H. L., (2003), Detection, Estimation and  Modulation Theory: Part -1, 2nd 
Edition, John Wiley 
2.  Kay, S.M., (1998), Fundamentals of Statistical Signal Processing: Vol. 2 Detection 
Theory, 1st Edition, Prentice Hall 
 
 
274 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Sinha, R., Signal Detection and Estimation Theory, NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology 
Guwahati, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117103018/ 
     
Preparatory Course Material  
1. Thangraj, A., Probability Foundations for Electrical Engineers , NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117103018/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
275 
 
Title Optimal Filtering Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. IV Year, M. Tech., Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Knowledge of Probability Theory and 
Fundamentals of  Communications 
  
 
Objectives 
     The Instructor will: 
1.  Help students understand the relationship between optimal filtering, linear 
estimation, and Wiener/Kalman filtering 
 
Learning Outcomes  
     The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Derive and manipulate the time discrete and time continuous Wiener and Kalman 
filter equations and compute the Wiener and Kalman filter f or a given estimation 
problem. 
2.  Design optimal filters in the case of non-Gaussian noise or non-linear models. 
 
Contents  
Weiner Theory for scalar processes : continuous time Weiner smoothing, solution to 
Weiner Hopf equation, discrete time Weiner Hopf technique, recursive Weiner filtering, 
time-invariant state space models, recursive estimation given st ate-space models  (14 
Lectures) 
Kalman Filter: Derivation of the Kalman filter, Filter properties, Steady -state Kalman 
filter,    Prediction and smoothin g, Kalman filter recursions, recursion for predicted and 
filtered state estimators (14 Lectures) 
Nonlinear Filtering : The extended Kalman filter, The Levenberg -Marquardt 
measurement update, Applications in navigation and signal processing (14 Lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Kamen and Su, J. K., (1999), Introduction to Optimal Estimation, Springer Verlag 
2.  Kailath, T., Sayed, A., and Hassibi, B., (2000), Linear Estimation, Prentice Hall 
 
 
 
276 
 
Title Digital video processing  Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. IV Year, M. Tech., Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Fourier analysis   
Objectives 
     The Instructor will: 
1.  introduce foundations of image and video signal processing and highlight similarities 
and differences between the two 
2. Expose student to importance of motion in videos and its estimation, and use it for 
applications such as video compression, object tracking/recognition 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  meaningfully exploit the concept of spatio -temporal information in visual signals to 
develop applications in the broad area of multimedia signal processing 
Contents  
Motion analysis in video signals:  Concepts of 2D motion, optical flow, block -based and 
pel-recursive methods for motion estimation, regularization techniques (8 lectures) 
Recent trends in video technologies: 
Stereo and multiview videos:  introduction to depth perception and disparity estimation, 
view 
Synthesis, stereo and multiview display (14 lectures) 
HDR and Wide Color Gamut (WCG) videos: capture via exposure fusion, single HDR 
cameras,  
HDR display modeling, Standard -gamut versus wide color gamut, ITU -T BT.709 and 
BT.2020  
(10 lectures) 
HDR-HFR-UHD-WCG: dependencies from human visual sys tem perspective, issue of 
viewing  
distance (6 lectures) 
360-degree videos: introduction to 360 -degree (omni directional) video capture and 
display,  
challenges in applying traditional 2D video processing techniques (4 lectures) 
 
 
277 
 
Textbook  
1. Tekalp,M., (2015), Digital Video Processing, 2nd Edition, Prentice Hall 
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Katsaggelos, A.K., Fundamentals of Image and Video Processing , Coursera, 
Northwestern University, https://www.coursera.org/learn/digital 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. Jagannatham, A. K., Principles of Signals and Systems , NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108104100/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
278 
 
Title Optical Fiber Communications Number EEL6XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. (IV Year), M.Tech., Ph.D.   Type Elective 
Prerequisite EM Theory   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide the fundamental principles and the practices followed in the area of optical 
communications. 
2. Enable the appreciation of the global connectivity achieved via optical fiber 
technology. 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Design and implement an end -to-end fiber optic communication link  using 
commercially available LASERs, LEDs and Photodetectors. 
 
Contents  
(Fractal 1)  Optical Fiber Waveguide: EEL6XX1 [1 -0-0] Introduction to :  Vector 
Nature of Light, Optical Fiber – Single and Multimode, Step index and Graded Index 
Fibers, Ray and Wave picture of propagation, Cut -off, mode field diameter, group 
delay, Gaussian field approximation. (8 Lectures) 
Transmission Characteristics: The consequences of attenuation and dispersion in Optical 
Fibers: Material, Waveguide, Polarizatio n, Intermodal and Intramodal Dispersion, 
Group velocity Dispersion, Dispersion modified single mode fibers. Fiber Fabrication 
Methods. (6 Lectures)  
(Fractal 2) Optical Sources and receivers:  EEL6XX2 [1-0-0] LASERS: Population 
inversion and feedback, Spontaneous and Stimulated emission, Injection LASERS, 
Gain and Index Guided LASERS, VSCELS, LASER Characteristics and Driver Circuits, 
Fiber Coupling. LED: Structure, Characteristics and Driver Circuits. (7 Lectures) 
Optical Receivers: Photo-detectors – PN, P -I-N, Avalanche Photodiodes, 
Phototransistors, Responsivity, Quantum Efficiency, Noise, Optical Receiver 
structures: Low, high and transimpedance front end, Low noise Preamplifiers. (7 
Lectures) 
(Fractal 3) Optical Fiber Link Design : EEL6XX3 [1 -0-0] Fiber joints, connectors, 
couplers and isolators, Splicing operation, System Planning considerations, quantum 
limit, SNR, BER calculation, Rise time budgeting, Power budgeting, Choice of 
components, Principles of Coherent and Incoherent Optical communication systems. 
(8 Lectures) 
Introduction to Nonlinear effects : Impact of SPM, XPM, FWM on communication 
systems, Raman and Brillioun Scattering and solition based communication. (4 
Lectures)  
279 
 
Miscellaneous:  EDFA, Raman amplifier, and WDM and SDM systems. (2 Lectures) 
Textbooks  
1. J. M. Senior, Optical Fiber Communications: Principles and Practice, Prentice 
Hall, 3rd Edition, 2010.  
2. G. Keiser, Fibre Optic Communication McGraw-Hill, 5th Edition. 2013. 
3. G. Agrawal, Fiber o ptic Communication Systems, John Wiley and sons, 4th 
Edition 2010. 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. NPTEL Lectures on Advanced Optical Communication by Prof. R.K. Shevgaonkar, 
IIT Bombay(https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117101002/) 
2. The RP Photonics Encyclopedia (https://www.rp-
photonics.com/encyclopedia.html) 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. (Fractal 1) Some concepts from “M.O. Sadiku and S.V. Kulkarni, Principles of 
Electromagnetics”, Oxford University Press, 6th edition, 2015. 
2. (Fractal 2) Some Concepts from “Jacob Millman et.al., Integrated Electronics”, 
McGraw Hill Education, 2nd Edition, 2017.   
3. (Fractal 3) Some concepts from “B.P. Lathi and Z. Ding, Modern Digital and 
Analog Communication Systems”, Oxford University Press, 4th Edition, 2011 
 
 
  
280 
 
 
Title Digital image processing and applications Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. IV Year, M. Tech., Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Fourier analysis   
 
Objectives 
     The Instructor will: 
1. introduce basic concepts in image signal capture and display 
2. provide an in-depth coverage of few recent applications of digital image processing 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  implement end-to-end systems that can capture, process and render a digital image in a 
desired fashion  
 
Contents  
Introduction: basic concepts of image signal capture, relation of pixels to physical luminance (3  
 lectures) 
Display modeling: concept of dynamic range, color correction, modeling of a conventional  
display, modeling of modern Led-backlit displays, applications (6 lectures) 
Image processing and Machine Learning: similarities and differences between traditional and  
ML based models, augmenting traditional image processing with ML (6 lectures) 
Sparse models for image processing: dictionary learning, modeling of natural image patches,  
applications of sparse modeling (denoising, inpainting, super resolution) (7 lectures) 
Image inpainting: use-case scenarios, analytical methods (PDE, SVD, dictionary learning etc.)  
for inpainting, exemplar-based inpainting, content-aware filling in Adobe Photoshop CS5,  
semantic inpainting using machine learning (10 lectures) 
Image saliency: bottom-up and top-down mechanisms, saliency due to color and texture,  
automatic saliency prediction using traditional and ML based approaches, applications of  
saliency (6 lectures) 
 
281 
 
Perceptual image processing: masking, contrast sensitivity, angular frequency and viewing  
Distance (4 lectures)  
 
Textbook  
1. Gonzalez, R.C. and Woods, R.E., (2018), Digital Image Processing, 4th Edition, Prentice Hall 
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Katsaggelos, A.K., Fundamentals of Image and Video Processing , Coursera, Northwestern 
University, https://www.coursera.org/learn/digital 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. Rao, R. V., Advanced Matrix Theory and Linear Algebra For Engineers , NPTEL Course 
Material, Centre for Electronics Design and Technology, Indian Institute of Science, 
Bangalore, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111108066/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
282 
 
Title Multirate Digital Signal Processing Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 
Offered for B.Tech. IV Year, M. Tech., Ph.D. Type Elective  
Prerequisite Digital Signal Processing   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide the concept of multirate signal processing and demonstrate the ability to 
solve the problems in sample rate conversion, filter banks and Transmultiplexers 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the basic concepts of multirate systems; understanding of decimation, 
interpolation and filterbanks  
2. Understand the realizations for upsampling and downsampling of signals using 
polyphaser decomposition 
3. design the filter banks based on the techniques discussed in the class 
 
Contents  
Review of Digital Filters, Multirate Systems (3 Lectures)  
Interconnection of Multirate DSP blocks, Multiplexer and demultiplexer functionality (4 
Lectures) 
Application of Multirate DSP: DFT- based filterbanks, Transmultiplexer, Filterbank 
Interpretation of Spectral Analysis using DFT, Two channel maximally decimated filter 
banks (6 Lectures) 
Introduction to OFDM (5 lectures) 
Multicarrier modulation, Block transceivers with redundancy, Zero-padding, cyclic prefx, 
OFDM, extensions of OFDM including Filterbank Multicarrier (FBMC) (6 lectures) 
Application of Multirate DSP: Delta Sigma A/D conversion (4 lectures) 
Textbook  
1.  Vaidyanathan, P. P., (2008), Multirate Systems and Filter Banks, Pearson Education 
2. Harris, F. J., (2007), Multirate Signal Processing for Communication Systems , 1 st 
Edition, Pearson Education 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Kovilpillai D., Multirate Digital Signal Processing, NPTEL Course Material, Department 
of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Chennai, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108106136/ 
 
 
283 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. Dutta, S. C. R., Digital Signal Processing , NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Techno logy Delhi, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117102060/  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
284 
 
Title Network Information Theory Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.-Ph.D. Dual Degree (Comm. Engg.) Type Elective  
Prerequisite Wireless Communications   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide fundamental concepts in multi -user and network information theory with 
applications in communications 
2. Expose students to the fundamentals of the multiple access channel, broadcast 
channel, channels with state, interference channel, relay channel, network coding 
and MIMO multiuser channels. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  the core ideas of network information theory, including key multi -user coding 
techniques, proof ideas and performance analysis in modern communications 
networks 
 
Contents  
Review of basic information theory concepts: entropy, mutual information (3 lectures) 
Multiple access channel: capacity, successive interference cancellation (4 lectures) 
Gaussian Degraded Broadcast Channels:  Discrete Memoryless Broadcast Channel, 
Simple Bounds on the Capacity Region, Superposition Coding Inner Bound, Degraded 
DM-BC, Gaussian Broadcast Channel (7 lectures) 
Channels with state:  DMC with state , Compound Channel, Arbitrarily Varying Channel, 
Channels with Random State, Causal State Information Available at the Encoder, Non -
causal State Information Available at the Encoder, dirty-paper coding (7 lectures) 
Interference channel:  Discrete Memoryless  Interference Channel, Simple Coding 
Schemes, Strong Interference, Gaussian Interference Channel, Han -Kobayashi Inner 
Bound, Capacity Region of the Gaussian IC within Half a Bit (7 lectures) 
Relay channel:  Cut-set Upper Bound on the Capacity, Direct -Transmission Lower 
Bound, Decode –Forward Lower Bound, Gaussian Relay Channel, Compress –Forward 
Lower Bound, Receiver Frequency Division Gaussian Relay Channel, Look -ahead Relay 
Channels (7 lectures) 
Multicast and interference networks:  network coding, noisy netw ork coding, 
interference alignment. (7 lectures) 
285 
 
 
Textbook  
1. Gamal A. E. and Kim Y. H., (2012), Network Information Theory , Cambridge 
University Press. 
2.  Kramer G., (2008), Topics in multi-user information theory, now Publishers Inc. 
3.  Cover T. and Thomas J., (2006), Element of Information Theory, Wiley-Interscience. 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Avestimehr A. S., Diggavi S.N. and Tse D. N. C., "Wireless Network Information 
Flow: A Deterministic Approach," IEEE Transactions on Informat ion Theory, Vol. 57, 
No. 4, pp.1872-1905, 2011. 
2. Dimakis A. G., Godfrey P. B., Wu Y., Wainwright M. J. and Ramchandran K., 
"Network Coding for Distributed Storage Systems," IEEE Transactions on 
Information Theory, Vol. 56, No. 9, pp. 4539 - 4551, 2010. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
286 
 
Title Radio Frequency Integrated Circuit Design Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. (IV Year), M.Tech, and PhD  Type Elective 
Prerequisite Analog electronics, Fundamentals of 
Communication engineering and EM Theory 
  
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce students to the integrated circuit designing at radio frequencies. 
2. Introduce various circuits and building blocks for communication applications. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the design of integrated circuits at high frequencies. 
2. Practically implement various circuits required to build a transceiver system. 
3. Learn about the design of various active components like mixers, LNAs, power 
amplifiers at RF and microwave frequencies. 
 
Contents  
Communication System Overview : Modulation, Mobile Systems, Multiple Access 
Techniques, Wireless Standards. (2 lectures) 
Noise:  Noise spectrum, device noise, noise in a circuit, effect of noise on trans fer 
function. (4 lectures) 
Transceiver Architectures:  Heterodyne Receivers, Direct -Conversion Receivers, Image 
Reject and Low IF Receivers, Transmitter Architectures. (4 lectures) 
Concepts of RF Design:  Wave Guides and Transmission Lines, coupled lines, S-
Parameters, Smith Chart, single and double stub impedance matching, Two -port gain 
and stability analysis. (10 lectures) 
Amplifier Design:  Concepts of nonlinearity, time variance and IIP3, model of MOS 
transistors and BJT at high frequencies, wideband amp lifiers, constant gain amplifier, 
constant noise figure amplifier, low noise amplifier, power amplifiers, combining 
networks. (9 lectures) 
Oscillators and Voltage Controlled Oscillators:  Basic topologies VCO and definition of 
phase noise. Noise -power trade -off, quadrature and single -sideband generators. (5 
lectures) 
Mixers: Mixer Noise figure, port to port feed -through, single -balanced and double 
balanced mixers. (4 lectures) 
Introduction to Phase -Locked Loops:  Type I and Type II PLL‟s, PLL Non -idealities. (4 
lectures) 
 
Textbook 
1. Lee, T. H., (1997), The Design of CMOS Radio -Frequency Integrated Circuits , 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press 
2. Razavi, B., (2014), RF Microelectronics, 2nd Edition, Pearson Education 
 
287 
 
3. Gonzalez, G., (1996), Microwave Transistor  Amplifiers: Analysis and Design , 2 nd 
edition, Pearson 
 
Self-Learning Materials  
1. Chatterjee, S., RF Integrated Circuits , NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, IIT Delhi, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/117102012/# 
2. High Speed Communication Circuits, MIT, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical -
engineering-and-computer-science/6-776-high-speed-communication-circuits-
spring-2005/lecture-notes/ 
 
Preparatory Course Materials 
1. Lathi, B. P., and Ding, Z., (2017), Modern Digital and Analog Communications 
Systems, 4th edition, Oxford university press 
2. Pozar, D. M., (2011), Microwave Engineering, 4th edition, New York, NY, USA: Wiley 
 
 
  
288 
 
Title Adaptive Signal Processing Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. (IV Year), M.Tech., Ph.D Type Elective  
Prerequisite Digital Signal Processing   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide students an understanding of fundamental issues related to adjustment of weights 
of processing filters based on requirement and signal characteristics. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Design various optimal filters such as Least Squares filters and its variants. 
2.  Apply the adaptive filtering techniques in various application areas such as speech, image, 
and video processing. 
 
Contents  
Introduction: Applications of Adaptive Signal Processing (1 Lecture) 
Review of linear and non-linear estimation theory: Properties of estimators, estimators of 
mean and variance, least square estimation, loss function, weighted least squares (6 lectures)  
Signal modelling, Optimal filtering, Adaptive filtering as an extension of the optimal least mean 
square error case Adaptive algorithms: Linear non-parametric signal models, parametric pole-
zero signal models, optimum signal estimation, linear mean square error estimation, optimum 
FIR and IIR response filters, derivation of LMS algorithm, convergence of weight vector, 
recursive least square adaptive filters, RLS algorithm (15 lectures) 
Adaptive equalization and echo cancellation:  structures and adaptive algorithms, double talk 
detection, Howling suppression, stereophonic acoustic echo cancellation (5 lectures) 
Adaptive lattice filters: Forward and backward linear prediction, derivation of lattice structure, 
lattice joint process estimator, autoregressive modeling, gradient adaptive lattice, RLS 
adaptive lattice, RLS lattice recursions  (10 lectures) 
Application to image processing, video processing, and communications (spread spectrum 
techniques) (5 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Haykin, S., (1986), Adaptive filter theory, Prentice Hall 
2. Widrow, B. and Stearns, S. D., (1984), Adaptive Signal Processing, Prentice Hall 
289 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Chakraborty M., Adaptive Signal Processing , NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117105075/ 
     
Preparatory Course Material  
1. Dutta Roy, S. C., Digital Signal Processing, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117102060/    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
290 
 
 
Title Image sensor Design and Applications Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech IV year, M. Tech, Ph. D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Analog electronics   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Introduce the design and analysis of CMOS image sensors.  
2.  Explain the readout electronics behind the camera. 
3. Provide the knowledge of performance measures and tradeoffs involved in the camera 
design. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Design and develop CMOS image sensor including the sensing mechanism and signal chain    
     of the camera. 
2.  Implement different techniques required for high dynamic range camera, high frame rate,  
     low noise camera, time of flight 3D cameras etc. 
 
Contents  
Introduction to photode tectors: Photodiode and photogate, photocurrent, dark current, 
quantum efficiency, spectral response and photo-conversion principles (5 Lectures). 
Introduction to Charge coupled devices and CMOS image sensors:  Operation, performance 
metrics, noise and its types, spatial resolution and modulation transfer function.  Concept of 
exposure triangle including aperture, shutter speed and ISO, color filters, Bayer pattern, 
Shutters and its types, motion blur, hard and soft reset, Introduction to imaging optics (8 
Lectures). 
Readout electronics and image sensor characterization:  Readout and its types, design tradeoffs 
and challenges, analysis of the signal path behind the camera, variable gain amplifiers, double 
sampling circuits,  ADCs, reference and clock generatio n circuits, floor planning, placement and 
routing, image sensor characterization (15 Lectures). 
Emerging trends : High speed cameras, high dynamic range cameras, 3D cameras for 
background light subtraction and depth estimation. Concepts of Polarization imag ing, low light 
imaging, machine vision, backside illumination, stacked technology, target tracking (10 
Lectures).  
291 
 
Color Processing: Color demosaicing, color correction and white balance (2 Lectures). 
Applications: Smart city, health care, autonomous vehicles, sports, motion detection, 
surveillance (2 Lectures). 
 
Textbook  
1. Ohta, J., (2007), Smart CMOS Image sensors and Applications, CRC press. 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. O. Y. Pecht, and Cummings, R. E., (2004), CMOS imagers: From Photo transduction to 
Image processing. 
2. Albert J.P. Theuwissen, Harvest imaging, https://harvestimaging.com/ 
3. Albert J.P. Theuwissen, Image sensors blog http://image-sensors-world.blogspot.com/  
 
Preparatory Course Material  
1. IEEE Journal of Solid State circuits 
   
 
 
 
 
  
292 
 
Title Digital image and video processing lab Number EEP7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 1–0–2 [2] 
Offered for B.Tech. IV Year, M. Tech., Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Fourier analysis   
 
Objectives 
     The Instructor will: 
1. introduce student to importance of motion in videos and motion estimation 
techniques 
2. discuss applications such as display modeling, video compression, and visual 
attention modeling 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  implement models for that affect visual signal display and perception 
2.  meaningfully exploit the concept of spatio -temporal information in videos to develop 
applications in the broad area of multimedia signal processing 
Contents  
Introduction: basic concepts of visual signal capture (both images and videos), relation 
of pixels to physical luminance (1 lecture) 
Display modeling:  concept of dynamic range, color correction, modeling of a 
conventional display (gamma correction, Weber law), HDR display model (3 
lectures) 
Motion estimation in video signals:  Concepts of 2D motion, and introduction to 
techniques such as optical flow, block-based and pel-recursive methods (2 lectures) 
Video compression: introduction to video coding standards (MPEG, H.26x), and their 
implementation (4 lectures) 
Depth Image based Rendering:  view synthesis and modeling, aspects of perceptual 
quality (2 lectures) 
Visual saliency modeling: introduction to visual attention in both 2D and omnidirectional 
(360-degree) content and basic models (2 lectures) 
Lab experiments: for each topic students will implement the corresponding models and 
examine the performance through standard metrics (~14 lab experiments) 
 
 
 
293 
 
Textbook  
1. Tekalp,M., (2015), Digital Video Processing, 2nd Edition, Prentice Hall 
2. Bovik, A., (2009), The Essential Guide to Video Processing, 1 st Edition, Academic 
Press 
3. Woods,J.W., (2006), Multidimensional Signal, Image and Video Processing and 
Coding, 2nd Edition, Academic Press  
4. Wang, Yao, (2003), Video Processing and Communications, 2nd Edition, Prentice Hall   
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Gupta, S., Digital Video Signal Processing , NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117104020/ 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. Jagannatham, A. K., Principles of Signals and Systems , NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108104100/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
294 
 
Title Radio Frequency Integrated Circuit Design 
Lab 
Number EEP7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 1–0–2[2] 
Offered for B.Tech. (IV Year) , M.Tech and PhD  Type Elective 
Prerequisite Analog Electronics, EM Theory   
 
Objectives  
     The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce the students to RF integrated circuit design and measurements. 
2. Introduce the students to various circuits required for communication applications. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
     The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Design RF circuits using softwares like ADS, HFSS. 
2. Design of integrated circuits at RF-Microwave frequencies. 
3. Implement various circuits required to build a transceiver. 
 
Contents 
1. Introduction to ADS and HFSS RF simulators. 
2. Calibration Network Analyzers (SOLT and TRL) / Use of Spectrum Analyzer/Tools 
and Tips for RF PCB design. 
3. Characterization of passive components at RF-Microwave frequencies. 
4. Design and Measurement of power combining/dividing networks. 
5. Measurement of RF Amplifier. 
6. Distortion Measurements. 
7. Noise Measurements.  
8. Phase Noise Measurement. 
9. Measurement of Mixers.  
10. Load/Source Pull Measurement for large signal characterization. 
 
Textbook 
1. Lee, T. H., (1997), The Design of CMOS Radio -Frequency Integrated Circuits , 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press 
2. Razavi, B., (2014), RF Microelectronics, 2nd Edition, Pearson Education 
3. Niknejad, A. M., (2007), Electromagnetics for High -Speed Analog and Digital 
Communication Circuits, Cambridge University Press 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. High Speed Communication Circuits, MIT, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-
engineering-and-computer-science/6-776-high-speed-communication-circuits-
spring-2005/lecture-notes/ 
2. Aniruddhan, S., RF Integrated Circuits, Department of Electrical Engineering,  Indian 
Institute of Technology Madras,  
http://www.ee.iitm.ac.in/videolectures/doku.php?id=ee6240_2013:start 
 
295 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
1.  Pozar, D. M., (2011), Microwave Engineering, 4th Edition, New York, NY, USA: Wiley 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
296 
 
Title Machine Learning for Communications  Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. IV Year, M. Tech., Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Fundamentals of communication systems, 
machine learning 1 
  
 
Objectives 
     The Instructor will: 
1.  Introduce the area of machine learning in the context of communications   
2. Discuss scenarios in the domain of communications where machine learning can  be 
a viable alternative to traditional approaches 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Apply machine learning techniques (supervised/unsupervised classification and 
regression) for specific problems in the domain of communications 
Contents  
Review of machine learning techniques as applicable in the area of communications (3 
lectures) 
Why and when machine learning can be useful in communication? (2 lectures) 
Overview of machine learning in communications (2 lectures) 
Machine learning for physical layer design: Adaptive modulation and coding (AMC), 
classical AMC, AMC using support vector machines, k-nearest neighbors, reinforcement 
learning (5 lectures) 
Channel prediction: prediction of wireless channel features via neural networks, channel 
prediction using Recurrent neural networks (3 lectures) 
Video communication: introduction to video coding standards (MPEG, H.26x), discussion 
of traditional algorithms (motion compensation, linear prediction etc.), modern 
approaches for video compression using machine learning (8 lectures) 
Machine learning for mobile network design:  network state prediction, traffic prediction 
and interference management, small cell clustering in Hetnet, u ser grouping/clustering 
in D2D, HetNets for offloading, modeling spatio -temporal correlations in geographical 
mobile traffic measurements using CNNs/RNNs (10 lectures) 
User mobility analysis: modeling spatial dependencies in sequential data (3 lectures) 
Learning based automatic modulation recognition in cognitive radios (2 lectures) 
Possible limitations of machine learning methods in communication systems (3 lectures) 
297 
 
Textbook  
1. Bishop, C. M., (2007), Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, Springer 
2. MacKay, D.J.C., (2005), Information Theory, Inference, and Learning Algorithms, 
Cambridge University Press 
 
Self-Learning Material  
Machine Learning For Communications Emerging Technologies Initiative, IEEE 
https://mlc.committees.comsoc.org/research-library/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
298 
 
Title Machine Learning for Communication lab Number EEP7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 1–0–2 [2] 
Offered for B.Tech. IV Year, M. Tech., Ph.D.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite Machine learning 1   
 
Objectives 
     The Instructor will 
1. Introduce students to scenarios in which machine learning methods can be applied  
2. Provide students problems in the domain of communications  and signal processing 
where machine learning can  be a viable alternative to traditional approaches 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Apply machine learning techniques (supervised/unsupervised classification and 
regression) for specific problems in the domain of communications and signal 
processing 
 
Contents  
Why and when machine learning can be useful in communication and signal processing? 
(1 lecture) 
User mobility analysis: modeling spatial dependencies in sequential data (2 lectures) 
Visual communication systems: application of machine learning for video compression 
(2 lectures) 
Machine learning for video quality prediction (3 lectures) 
Learning based automatic modulation recognition in cognitive radios (2 lectures) 
Smart wireless network management using machine learning (2 lectures) 
Possible limitations of machine learning methods in communication systems (2 lectures) 
Textbook  
1. Bishop, C. M., (2007), Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, Springer 
2. MacKay, D.J.C., (2005), Information Theory, Inference, and Learning Algorithms, 
Cambridge University Press 
 
Self Learning Material  
Machine Learning For Communications Emerging Technologies Initiative, IEEE 
https://mlc.committees.comsoc.org/research-library/  
299 
 
 
Title GNSS Signal Processing Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech., M. Tech., Ph. D.  Type Elective  
Prerequisite Fundamentals of Communications and Signals 
and Systems 
  
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Describe and analyze the signal processing of a GNSS receiver, including signal 
acquisition, tracking and navigation. 
2. Expose students to the main vulnerabilities and limitations of GNSS technology, 
including interference sources such as jamming, unintentional interferences, 
spoofing and ionospheric scintillation. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Understand the basic principles and signal processing tools that are used in satellite-
based navigation for signal acquisition and computation of positioning solutions. 
2.  Analyze the state of the art signal acquisition methods and countermeasures 
strategies for interference and spoofing. Interpret anti -jamming techniques in the 
context of robust signal processing theory. 
 
Contents  
Course introduction: positioning is everywhere; GNSS is a key technology; main GNSS 
components; GNSS limitations; review of mathematical tools. (3 lectures) 
Fundamentals of satel lite-based navigation:  historical remarks on navigation; 
positioning concepts; system segments; space segment; ground segment; user 
segment. (4 lectures) 
GNSS signals in space:  overview of the main signal characteristics: GPS, Galileo, 
GLONASS, Beidou, IRN SS; focus on IRNSS SPS and RS signal; BPSK vs BOC 
modulations. (3 lectures) 
GNSS channel model:  propagation delay; Doppler effect; multipath and non -line-of-
sight; ionospheric and tropospheric delays. (4 lectures) 
GNSS receiver:  antenna and RF front -end; s ignal sampling; signal acquisition as a 
detection problem; signal tracking as a filtering problem; observables‟ computation. (7 
lectures) 
300 
 
 
Navigation solution: Code-based positioning; Code  and carrier -based positioning; least 
squares solution; weighted le ast squares solution; Kalman filtering solution; basic 
schemes for GNSS/inertial hybridization. (7 lectures) 
Vulnerabilities of GNSS:  intentional interferences and jammers; unintentional 
interferences; spoofing attacks; ionospheric scintillation; detection  and mitigation 
techniques. (7 lectures) 
Indoor positioning:  basic measurements; positioning approaches: model -based versus 
model-free methods; hybridization and data fusion; main technologies. (7 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Betz J. W., (2015), Engineering Satellite-Based Navigation and Timing: Global 
Navigation Satellite Systems, Signals, and Receivers, Wiley-IEEE Press. 
2.  Kaplan E. and Hegarty C. J., (2017), Understanding GPS/GNSS: Principles and 
Applications, Artech House. 
3. Misra P. and Enge P., (2011 ), Global Positioning System: Signals, Measurements, 
and    Performance, Ganga-Jamuna Press. 
 
Preparatory Course Material  
1. Zheng, L. and Gallager, R., Principles of Digital Communications I , MIT 
OpenCourseWare, Electrical Engineering & Computer Science,  Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical -engineering-and-computer-
science/6-450-principles-of-digital-communications-i-fall-2006/ 
 
 
  
301 
 
Title Free Space Optical Communications Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech IV Year, M.Tech. and Ph.D Type Elective 
Prerequisite Fundamentals of probability, wireless and optical 
communications 
  
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Give a comprehensive introduction of the fundamentals of Free Space Optical (FSO) 
communications. 
2. Help students understand the techniques to improve the performance of FSO 
communication systems.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Ability to analyze FSO system performance under various channel impairments. 
2. Ability to design and simulate efficient FSO links by utilizing the knowledge of 
mitigation techniques which could be used advanced research. 
 
Contents  
Fundamentals of Free Space Optical (FSO) communication s ystems: Motivation, 
advantages, limitations, applications (3 Lectures) 
FSO components: FSO transmitter and receiver structures, optical sources, optical 
amplifiers, photodetectors, photodetection techniques (4 Lectures) 
FSO channel and noise modeling: Diff erent losses in FSO systems, atmospheric 
turbulence models, pointing errors, noise sources, background radiation (7 Lectures) 
Modulation schemes: Subcarrier intensity modulation, on -off keying, M -ary pulse 
position modulation (M -PPM), differential PPM, dif ferential amplitude pulse -position 
modulation digital pulse interval modulation (6 Lectures) 
Performance analysis of FSO systems: BER evaluation of different modulation schemes 
under atmospheric turbulence and pointing errors, information theoretic limits of 
FSO systems, asymptotic behavior (8 Lectures) 
Mitigation techniques for improved FSO performance: Aperture averaging, diversity    
techniques and MIMO FSO, adaptive optics techniques (10 Lectures) 
Miscellaneous: Physical layer security in FSO (4 Lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Ghassemlooy, Z., Popoola, W., and Rajbhandari, S., (2019), Optical Wireless 
Communications: System and Channel Modelling with MATLAB® , 2 nd Edition, CRC 
Press  
302 
 
2. Djordjevic, I. B., (2018), Advanced Optical and Wireless Communications Syst ems, 
1st Edition, Springer 
3. Majumdar, A. K., (2015), Advanced Free Space Optics - A System Approach , 1 st 
Edition, Springer  
 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. Kumar, P. K., Optical Communications, Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian 
Institute of Technology Kanpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117104127/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
303 
 
Title Real Time Communications Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech., M. Tech. and Ph. D.  Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Introduce QoS and design criteria for real time communication for wired and 
wireless networks. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Design protocols and links for real time communication over wired and wireless 
networks. 
 
Contents  
Introduction: Type of network, Quality of Service, Traffic Categorization (4 Lectures) 
Real-Time Communication in Wired Networks:  RTC in LAN , Soft and Hard read time 
communication, RTC over internet, Routing, resource reservation, traffic shaping and 
policing, scheduling, Real -Time Communication Via Ethernet in Industrial Automation 
Environments (14 Lectures) 
Real-Time Communication in Packet -Switched Networks: Real-Time Scheduling Theory, 
Traffic Characterization, Connection -Level Processing, Per -Packet Processing, 
Scheduler-based Methods, Application -level Characteristics, Connection -level Issues (7 
Lectures) 
Real-Time Communication over Unre liable Wireless Links:  A necessary and sufficient 
condition for feasibility, Utility maximization, broadcasting real -time flows with network 
coding and xor coding (7 Lectures) 
Real-time communication protocols:  Token-ring networks, Broadcast networks, Othe r 
networks, Real -time support in the higher layers, Blink protocol for Real -Time 
Communication for Wireless Cyber-Physical Systems (10 Lectures) 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Mall R., Real-time Systems , NPTEL Course Material, Computer Science and 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106105086/6 
 
304 
 
2. Decotignie J. -D., Ethernet Based Real -Time and Industrial Communications, Proc. of 
the IEEE, vol. 93, issue 6, pp.  1102-17, 2005. 
3.  Hou I. and Kumar P. R., "Real -time communication over unreliable wireless links: a 
theory and its applications," in IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 
48-59, 2012. 
4.  Hanssen F., & Jansen P.G., (2003), Real-time communication protocols: an 
overview. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
305 
 
Title Backhaul Networks for Wireless 
Systems 
Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech., M. Tech. and Ph. D.  Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Introduce the communication backhaul networks for future wireless systems. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Understand concepts such as caching, mmWave backhauling, channel aggregation and 
perform analysis and optimization of backhaul technologies. 
 
Contents  
Introduction: Backhaul networks - Wired solutions, Wireless solutions; The Communication Haul 
Challenge, Evolution of Backhaul networks -  LTE mobile backhaul, Multi -RAT and multi -operator 
backhaul, LTE-A backhaul, Future RAN and backhaul evolution (3 lectures) 
Spectral coexistence for next generation wireless backhaul networks:  Research trends in wireless 
backhaul, Hybrid satellite-terrestrial backhaul, Case studies, Future recommendations (4 lectures) 
Control data separation and its implications on backhaul networks:   RAN design in legacy 
standards,  5G RAN with control/data separation,  Main challenge for backhaul networks (7 
lectures) 
Backhaul relaxation through caching:  Background on content caching, Caching in 5G wireless 
systems, Energy efficiency and caching in 5G systems (5 lectures) 
Backhauling 5G Small Cells with Massive ‐MIMO‐Enabled mmWave Communication:  mmWave 
Communication, mmWave Backhauling, Research Challenge s for Backhauling in 5G Networks, 
Massive‐MIMO‐based mmWave Backhauling System (12 lectures) 
Analysis and Optimization for Heterogeneous Backhaul Technologies:  Backhaul Model, Backhaul 
Packet Delay Analysis, Backhaul Deployment Cost Analysis, Backhaul ‐aware BS Association Policy 
(5 lectures) 
Multiband and Multichannel Aggregation for High ‐speed Wireless Backhaul:  Challenges and 
Solutions, Multiband and Multichannel Aggregation, Spectrally Efficient Channel Aggregation, 
Practical System Examples (6 lectures) 
 
 
306 
 
Textbook  
1. Saidul Huq K. M. and Rodriguez J., (2016), Backhauling / Fronthauling for Future Wireless 
Systems, Wiley-Blackwell. 
2. Imran M. A., Zaidi S. A. R., and Shakir M. Z., Access, (2017), Fronthaul and Backhaul Networks 
for 5G & Beyond, IET Press. 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. IEEE Best Readings in Backhaul and Fronthaul: Communications, Networking, and Signal 
Processing https://www.comsoc.org/publications/best-readings/backhaul-and-fronthaul-
communications-networking-and-signal-processing 
2.ETSI 5G WirelessBackhaul/X-Haul, 
https://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_gr/mWT/001_099/012/01.01.01_60/gr_mWT012v010101p.
pdf 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
307 
 
Title Applied Optimization for Wireless 
Communication 
Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech., M. Tech. and Ph. D.  Type Elective  
Prerequisite Basic knowledge of - Calculus, Probability, 
Matrices 
  
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Expose students to the fundamental tools and techniques in modern optimization. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Apply Convex Optimization techniques to various aspects of wireless communication 
systems.  
 
Contents  
Introduction to properties of Vectors, Norms, Positive Semi -Definite, matrices, Gaussian 
Random Vectors (6 Lectures) 
Introduction to Convex Optimization, Convex sets, Hyperplanes Half -spaces etc. 
Application: Power constraints in Wireless Systems (6 Lectures) 
Convex Concave Functions, Examples, Conditions for Convexity. Application: 
Beamforming in Wireless Systems, Multi -User Wireless, Cognitive Radio Systems (6 
Lectures) 
Convex Optimization problems, Linear Program, Application: Power allocation in Multi -
cell cooperative OFDM 
QCQP, SOCP Problems, Application: Channel shortening for Wi reless Equalization, 
Robust Beamforming in Wireless Systems (8 Lectures) 
Duality Principle and KKT Framework for Optimization. Application: Water -filling power 
allocation, Optimization for MIMO Systems, OFDM Systems and MIMO-OFDM systems (7 
Lectures) 
Optimization for signal estimation, LS, WLS, Regularization. Application: Wireless 
channel estimation (2 Lectures) 
Application: Cooperative Communication, Optimal Power Allocation for cooperative, 
Communication (2 Lectures) 
Application: Radar for target detection, Array Processing, MUSIC, MIMO-Radar Schemes 
for Enhanced Target Detection (2 Lectures) 
308 
 
Application: Autonomous self-organization in dynamic wireless networks (3 Lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Boyd S. P. and Vandenberghe L., (2004), Convex Optimization , Cambridge 
University Press. 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Jagannatham A., Applied Optimization for Wireless, Machine Learning, Big Data , 
NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of 
Technology Kanpur, https://nptel.ac.in/noc/individual_course.php?id=noc18-ee31 
2.  Llorca J., Milner S. D. and  Davis C. C., "A convex optimization method for 
autonomous self-organization in dynamic wireless networks," MILCOM 2008 - 2008 
IEEE Military Communications Conference, San Diego, CA, pp. 1-8, 2008. 
     
 
 
 
 
  
309 
 
Title Millimeter-wave Technology Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. (IV Year), M.Tech, and PhD  Type Elective 
Prerequisite Electromagnetic theory   
 
Objectives  
     The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce the students with the phenomenon and circuit characteristics at mm -wave 
frequency ranges. 
2. Familiarize students with various guiding structures, antennas, and switches at mm -
wave frequencies. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
     The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the design problems and challenges at mm-wave frequencies. 
2. Have the knowledge about the various mm -wave guiding structures, switches, and 
antennas. 
 
Contents  
 
Introduction to millimeter-wave technology : mm-wave frequency bands, atmospheric 
losses, application of mm -waves, Propagation and path losses, Friis equation, link 
budget and power budget calculation. (4 lectures) 
Novel Guiding structures for mmwave circuits:  losses in planar circuits (conductor loss, 
leakage loss, dielectric loss, surface waves), Air filled waveguides, dielectric guides, 
NRD guide, substrate integrated waveguides (SIW), Substrate Integrated NRD (SINRD), 
Gap Waveguide, dielectric image line, planar air filled waveguide, Waveguide and planar 
resonators, Dielectric resonators, loaded, unloaded, and external Q -factors, SPST and 
SPDT switches. (8 lectures) 
Beam-forming network:  Introduction to mmwave circuits: hybrid coupler, crossover, 
phase shifter, butler matrix, nolen matrix, Rotman lens. (5 lectures)  
Millimeter wave antennas:  Problem with traditional antennas, horn antenna, dielectric 
rod antenna, Leaky wave antenna, waveguide slot array, chain antenna array, on chip 
antennas, monopulse radar network, tran smitarray, reflectarray, millimeterwave over 
the air (OTA) measurement testing: Total Radiated Power (TRP), Total Isotropic 
Sensitivity (TIS), Effective Isotropic Radiated Power (EIRP), Effective Isotropic 
Sensitivity (EIS). (10 lectures) 
Packaging and int erconnects: Challenges in packaging, design of interconnects at mm -
wave frequencies, bondwire interconnections, ball-grid array. (3 lectures) 
Millimeterwave Active circuits:  mmwave CMOS circuits: LNA,  Oscillator, VCO, Power 
Amplifier, Frequency Synthesizer, SoC for mmwave RADAR, FinFET (10 Lectures) 
Case Studies: mmwave transciever for 5G, industrial radar sensor (2 lectures) 
 
310 
 
Textbook 
1. Koul, S.K., (1997), Millimeter Wave and Optical Dielectric Integrated Guides and 
Circuits, Wiley-Blackwell 
2. Liu, D., Gaucher, B., Pfeiffer, U., and Grzyb, J., (2009), Advanced millimeter wave 
technologies, Wiley 
3. Hueber, G., and Niknejad, A. (Eds.). (2019), Millimeter-Wave Circuits for 5G and 
Radar (The Cambridge RF and Microwave Engineering Series), Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
1. Mandal, M. K., Millimeter-wave technology, NPTEL Course Material, Indian Institute 
of Technology Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117105139/ 
 
Preparatory Course Material  
1.  Pozar, D. M., (2011), Microwave Engineering, 4th ed. New York, NY, USA: Wiley  
 
 
 
 
  
311 
 
 
Title Selected Topics in Communication I Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 
Offered for M.Tech., PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite Fundamentals of Wireless Communications   
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Expose the students to the latest upcoming fields in the area of communications 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply the knowledge of recent topics  in the field of communications to specific 
areas of research  
 
Contents  
The topic clouds for the course include some contemporary topics in communications 
(but not restricted to) mm-Wave wireless communications, wireless networks, quantum 
information processing, molecular communications. The topics may be further updated 
according to the instructor. 
 
Textbook  
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
 
 
 
 
312 
 
Title Selected Topics in Communication II Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 
Offered for M.Tech., PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite Fundamentals of Wireless Communications   
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Expose the students to the latest upcoming fields in the area of communications 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply the knowledge of recent topics  in the field of communications to specific 
areas of research  
 
Contents  
The topic clouds for the course include some contemporary topics in communic ations 
(but not restricted to) mm-Wave wireless communications, wireless networks, quantum 
information processing, molecular communications. The topics may be further updated 
according to the instructor. 
 
Textbook  
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
313 
 
Title Selected Topics in Communication III Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech., PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite Fundamentals of Wireless Communications   
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Expose the students to the latest upcoming fields in the area of communications 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply the knowledge of recent topics  in the field of communications to specific 
areas of research  
 
Contents  
The topic clouds for the course include some contemporary topics in communications 
(but not restricted to) mm-Wave wireless communications, wireless networks, quantum 
information processing, molecular communications. The topics may be further updated 
according to the instructor. 
 
Textbook  
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
314 
 
Title Physical Layer Security Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech. (IV Year), M. Tech., Ph. D. Type Elective  
Prerequisite Fundamentals of Information Theory    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Familiarize the students with the fundamental concepts of information theoretic 
security such as perfect secrecy, wiretap channels, secrecy capacity etc. 
2. Help students understand the proofs of fundamental theorems in information 
theoretic secrecy 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Acquire the current state of research on physical layer security  
2.  Apply the physical layer security techniques learnt to formulate a problem for 
research and solve them in a comprehensive manner  
Contents  
Fundamentals of Physical Layer Security: Information-theoretic secrecy, secret 
communication over noisy channels, Secret-key generation from noisy channels 
Coding for secrecy:  Coding for wiretap channels, Polar wiretap codes, LDPC codes for 
the Gaussian wiretap channel 
Physical Layer Security Techniques: Cooperative jamming, MIMO signal processing 
algorithms for enhanced physical layer security, secrecy  through intentional 
uncertainty, secure modulation schemes, secure  
Applications to Contemporary Communication Systems: secure waveforms for 5G, 
security of massive MIMO and mm -Wave cellular systems, security in IoT and massive 
machine type communications: issues and challenges 
Textbook  
1. Bloch, M. and Barros, J., (2011), Physical-Layer Security: From Information Theory 
to Security Engineering, 1st Edition, Cambridge University Press. 
2. Zhou, X., Song, L., and Zhang, Y., (2013), Physical Layer S ecurity in Wireless 
Communications, 1st Edition, CRC Press. 
3. Duong, T. Q., Zhou, X., and Poor, H. V., (2016), Trusted Communications with 
Physical Layer Security for 5G and Beyond, 1st Edition, IET. 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Liu, R. and Trappe, W., (2010), Securing Wireless Communications at the Physical 
Layer, 1st Edition, Springer. 
 
 
315 
 
Title Computational imaging Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. IV Year, M. Tech., Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Basics of signals and systems   
 
Objectives 
     The Instructor will: 
1.  Introduce computational techniques and aspects of image capture, processing and 
rendering  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Implement end-to-end imaging systems that can capture and process visual data in 
a desired manner 
 
Contents  
Introduction and digital photography pipeline (3 lectures) 
Pinholes and lenses, Photographic optics and exposure, High dynamic range imaging,  
tonemapping and bilateral filtering (7 lectures) 
Gradient-domain image processing, Focal stacks and lightfields (6 lectures) 
Deconvolution, Camera models and calibration (6 lectures) 
Two-view geometry, Radiometry and reflectance, Photometric stereo, Light transport 
matrices  
(6 lectures)   
Computational light transport, Stereo and structured light (6 lectures)  
Time-of-flight imaging, Non-line-of-sight imaging, Fourier optics (8 lectures) 
Textbook  
1. Szeliski, R., (2010), Computer vision: Algorithms and Applications,  1st Edition, 
Springer  
2. Lukac, R., (2010), Computational Photography: Applications and Methods, 1st 
Edition, CRC Press 
  Self Learning Material  
1. Gkioulekas, I., Computational Photography, Fall 2019 , Department of Computer 
Science, Carnegie Melon University, http://graphics.cs.cmu.edu/courses/15-463/ 
 
 
316 
 
Title Multimedia Communications  Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. IV Year, M. Tech., Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Fourier analysis   
Objectives 
     The Instructor will: 
1.  introduce concepts in multimedia communication systems with focus on technology 
specific standards   
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Implement and improve upon recent standards in multimedia communication   
Contents  
Introduction to multimedia signals:  capture, storage and representation of im age, video 
and audio signals. Analog -to-digital conversion, sampling and aliasing , brief 
discussion on graphics and text content (4 lectures) 
Multimedia compression:  the need for compression and brief history of standards (3 
lectures) 
MPEG 7 and MPEG 21: evolution from MPEG 1,2 and MPEG 4,  multimedia content 
management and description standards, applications and implementations (5 
lectures) 
Introduction and Evolution of video coding standards: the ne ed for continuous 
improvements in standards (2 lectures) 
H.264/MPEG-4 AVC: intra and inter frames, mode decision, I, P , B frames, prediction, 
motion Compensation (6 lectures) 
HEVC/H.265: the need for H.265, concept of coding tree u nits (CTU), adaptive 
macroblock sizes, directional modes, scalability to higher resolutions (5 lectures)  
Scalable video coding: SVC (annex G e xt. of H.264/MPEG -4 AVC) and SHVC (scalable 
ext. of HEVC) (5 lectures) 
HDR and WCG coding:  backward compatilbity with single and dua l layer, display 
adaptation (5 lectures)  
Multiview and adaptive coding:  MVC Extension of H.264/AV C, introduction to MPEG -
DASH (3 lectures)  
Future standards: Versatile video coding (VVC) or H.266, 360-video specific standard,  
perceptual video compression, deep learning to enhance compression performance (4 
lectures) 
 
 
317 
 
Textbook  
Self Learning Material  
1. Motion Pictures Experts Group (MPEG), ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 29/WG 11, 
https://mpeg.chiariglione.org/ 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. Katsaggelos, A.K., Fundamentals of Image and Video Processing , Coursera, 
Northwestern University, https://www.coursera.org/learn/digital 
2. Wiegand, T., Sullivan, G.J., Bjontegaard, G., Luthra, A., Overview of the H.264/AVC 
video coding standard, IEEE, 2003 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
318 
 
Title Speech and Audio Signal Processing Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech, M.Tech. -Ph.D.  Dual Degree (Comm. 
Engg.) 
Type Elective 
Prerequisite Digital Signal Processing   
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce the theory of signal processing applications on speech, to give information 
about human speech production and perception, voice production mechanism, and 
human perception systems.  
2. Provide an understanding of time frequency analysis of speech,  Linear Prediction, 
speech analysis/synthesis.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Analyze digital signals, e.g., audio signals, in the time or frequency domain 
2. Implement widely-used algorithms for speech analysis and speech processing in the 
frequency or time domain.  
 
Contents  
Introduction to the properties of speech and audio signal processing  (2 Lectures) 
 
Basic Methods of audio signal processing:  Frequency analysis methods, Auto correlation 
Function(ACF), Power Spectral Density(PSD), Measurement of room impulse response 
and reverberation times (8 Lectures) 
 
Methods for codebook processing: Principle, Training of codebooks, Efficient codebook 
search (8 Lectures) 
 
Audio coding: Prediction coding, line spectral frequencies(LSF), code excited linear 
prediction(CELP) (8 lectures) 
 
Speaker detection based on MFCC combined with LDA and PCA, Speech recognition, 
Acoustic Classification Methods: Bayes Methods, HMM, GMM (12 Lectures) 
 
Music Signal Processing, e.g. beat detection. (4 Lectures) 
 
Textbook 
1. Rabiner, L. and Schafer, R., (2011), Theory and Applications of Speech Processing , 
Pearson. 
2. Rabiner, L. and Schafer, R., (2007), Introduction to Digital speech Processing , 
Publishers Inc. 
3. Gold, B., and Morgan, N., (2011), Speech and Audio Signal Processing, John Wiley. 
 
319 
 
Self-Learning Material: 
1. Hegde, R. M., Signal Processing Techniques for Speech Recognition, NPTEL 
Course Material, Department of Electronics & Communication Engineering, 
Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur,  https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/117104023/ 
2. http://www.infocobuild.com/education/audio-video-
courses/electronics/elec9344-audio-processing-unsw.html 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. Dutta Roy S. C., Digital Signal Processing, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Electrical Engineeri ng, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117102060/ 
 
 
 
 
  
320 
 
Title Wavelets Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. -Ph.D.  Dual Degree (Comm. Engg.) Type Elective 
Prerequisite Digital Signal Processing   
 
Objectives 
The Instructor Will: 
1. Introduce the idea of wavelets, and the related notions of time -frequency analysis, of time -
scale analysis, and to describe the manner in which technical developments related to wavelets 
have led to numerous applications 
 
Learning Outcomes  
 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Understand the relationship between wavelets and multiresolution systems  
2. Apply the wavelets for different real time application 
 
Contents  
Introduction to Multiresolution Analysis (MRA), Vector spaces, Haar scaling function, Haar 
wavelet (8 Lectures) 
 
Two-band perfect reconstruction filter bank,  Conditions for perfect reconstruction in a general 
two-band perfect reconstruction filter bank (8 Lectures) 
 
Daubechies family of filter banks (6 Lectures) 
 
Time-bandwidth product and its properties, Uncertainty principle of signal processing, Short -
time Fourier transform (STFT), Continuous wavelet transform (CWT), Admissibility condition for 
wavelets (12 Lectures) 
 
Axioms of MRA, Proof of Theorem of MRA (5 Lectures) 
 
5/3 filter bank used in JPEG 2000 (3 Lecture) 
 
Textbook  
1. Y. T. Chan, (1993), Wavelet Basics, Kluwer Publishers, Boston. 
2. Gerald Kaiser, (1992), A Friendly Guide to Wavelets, Birkhouser, New York. 
3. Daubechies, I., (1993), Ten Lectures on Wavelets , Society for Industrial and Applied 
mathematics. 
 
Self-Learning Material: 
1. Gadre V. M., Adv. Digital Signal Processing- Multirate and Wavelets, Department of Electrical 
Engineering, Indian Instit ute of Technology Bombay, 
http://nptel.iitm.ac.in/courses/117101001 
321 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. Dutta Roy S. C., Digital Signal Processing, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117102060/ 
 
 
  
322 
 
Title Compressive Sensing Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech., M. Tech. and Ph. D.  Type Elective  
Prerequisite Signals and Systems, Random Signal Analysis   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Introduce development of compressed sensing and matrix completion, focusing on 
the design and analysis of algorithms to recover data from its compressed and/or 
incomplete measurements. 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Use signal processing techniques to solve undetermined linear systems. 
Contents  
Sparse representation: Sparse representation in over -complete basis, Uniqueness and 
uncertainty principles, l0 minimization and l1 minimization (7 Lectures) 
Model selection in linear regression: Prediction risk, l 0-penalized regression and Lasso, 
Risk inflation, Minimax risk for sparse vectors (7 Lectures) 
Lasso algorithms and extensions: Proximal gradient methods, Nesterov accelerated 
methods, Group lasso and elastic net (7 Lectures) 
Compressed sensing and sparse recovery: Restricted isometry property (RIP), A RIPless 
theory, Golfing scheme, Phase transition and convex geometry (7 Lectures) 
Low-rank matrix recovery: Spectral method, Nuclear norm minimization (4 Lectures) 
Super-resolution and spectral estimation: Model mismatch issue in compressed sensing, 
Matrix pencil approach, Atomic norm minimization, Connection to low -rank matrix 
completion (10 Lectures) 
Textbook 
1. Hastie T., Tibshirani R. and Wainwright M., (2015), Statistical learning with sparsity: 
the Lasso and generalizations, CRC. 
2. Foucart S. and Rauhut H., (2013), A mathematical introduction to  compressive 
sensing, Springer. 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Compressive Sensing resources, Rice University, http://dsp.rice.edu/cs/ 
 
 
 
323 
 
Title Selected Topics in Signal Processing I Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 
Offered for M.Tech., PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Expose the students to the latest upcoming fields in the area of signal 
processing 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply the knowledge of recent topics  in the field of signal processing to specific 
areas of research  
 
Contents  
The topics may be further updated according to the instructor. 
 
Textbook  
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
324 
 
Title Selected Topics in Signal Processing II Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 
Offered for M.Tech., PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Expose the students to the latest upcoming fields in the area of signal 
processing 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply the knowledge of recent topics  in the field of signal processing to specific 
areas of research  
 
Contents  
The topics may be further updated according to the instructor. 
 
Textbook  
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
325 
 
Title Selected Topics in Signal Processing III Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech., PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Expose the students to the latest upcoming fields in the area of signal 
processing 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply the knowledge of recent topics  in the field of signal processing to specific 
areas of research  
 
Contents  
The topics may be further updated according to the instructor. 
 
Textbook  
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
326 
 
Title Data Compression Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech., M.Tech., and Ph.D Type Elective 
Prerequisite Elementary knowledge of Information Theory   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Introduce basic principles of data compression methods 
2.  Familiarize students with the advances in data compression methods 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Implement some of the existing compression methods 
2.  Contribute in developing application-specific such methods 
Contents  
Basic Techniques:  Run length coding, sampling and quantization, some statistical 
methods such Huffman, Arithmetic, Golomb, and QM Coder (4 lectures) 
Dictionary Methods:  String compression, Lemple and ziv methods and some of their 
variants. Zip and Gzip (4 Lectures) 
Image and Video Coding: Concept of spatial and temporal redundancies, Predictive and 
transform based methods for Lossless and Lossy Image compression, Lossless Medical 
Image compression standards, Some still image compression standards such JPEG 
Baseline, JPEG-LS, JPEG 2000, Video Coding, Block matching and computational issues, 
MPEGs, Compression standards for 3D TV (18 Lectures) 
Audio Compression: Human Auditory system, A-Law and mu-Law companding, Adaptive 
DPCM and computational issues, Delta modulation, Audio and Speech compression, 
MPEG-1 audio coding (14 Lectures) 
Case studies: Current needs in Image, video, and text compression (2 Lectures) 
Textbook  
1. Khalid, S., (2006), Introduction to Data Compression, Elsevier 
2. Solomon, D., (2007), Data Compression, The complete Reference, Springer 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Sengupta, S., Digital Voice and Picture Communication , NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Electrical and Electronics Communication Engineering, Indian 
Institute of Technology Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117105081/     
 
Preparatory Material  
1. Lathi, B. P., Ding, Z., Gupta , H. M.,  Modern Digital And Analog Communication 
Systems, Chapter 12 Introduction to Information Theory: Fourth Edition, Oxford 
University Press   
 
 
327 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
M.Tech & M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree Program 
in 
Department of Bioscience & Bioengineering 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
328 
 
1. Introduction 
The biological world is full of natural  wonders beginning from microscopic bacteria to multicellular 
organisms. Using a reductionist approach, each organism can be broken down into its subsystems, 
which continue to provide us with new knowledge on how evolution has perfected these systems 
over millennia. Conversely, one can also take a systems biology approach and appreciate the whole 
organism as a system that grows and continuously adapts to the environment. Beginning from 
thermodynamically efficient cellular systems to the molecular motors of the flagellar motor, each 
product of evolution is an optimized engineering design which can be translated into real -life 
applications across disciplines. Furthermore, the call for support from today‟s data -driven biology 
has been answered by advancements i n computational biology that permit solving biology 
problems using artificial intelligence and machine learning approaches. Genomics, proteomics, 
transcriptomics and metabolomics have transformed the landscape of infectious and non -infectious 
diseases allowing development of new diagnostic measures as well as therapeutics. In combination 
with active contribution from Electronic, Mechanical, Materials engineering, implantable sensor and 
support devices that are bio -compatible have significantly contributed t o extending the healthy 
lifespan of the human race. The Department of Bioscience & Bioengineering aspires to cater to the 
technological requirements of the country by conducting high -quality, translatable, and 
interdisciplinary research in the aforementioned focus areas. 
2. Objective of the Programme 
To produce professionals with an in -depth knowledge of biological systems and phenomena, with 
critical thinking and bioengineering research skills that can be effectively put to use in solving 
problems in focus  domains including Healthcare, Energy, Environment, and Agriculture. The 
program will help graduates to approach problems in the above focus domains by providing 
knowledge and hands -on laboratory training in the areas of data driven multi -omics technologies, 
artificial intelligence & computational biology, systems biology, imaging -based diagnostics, 
biomaterials, and bio-therapeutics. 
 
 
 
 

329 
 
3. Expected Graduate Attributes 
Graduates will 
1. Be able to think critically and solve problems that are necessary for em ployment in 
biomedical, biotechnology, pharmaceutical industries, National research labs and Academic 
institutions at the global level. 
2. Develop a sense of ownership on the National missions for technology development, which 
will cater to societal needs suc h as affordable healthcare, clean energy, safe environment, 
and sustainable agriculture. 
3. Be exceptionally well trained in the laboratory enabling them to conduct high -quality, 
reproducible research. 
4. Be able to read, understand and review intellectual prope rty documents and recognize their 
rights. 
5. Be able to express their research ideas and present their data clearly in written and spoken 
format. 
6. Develop a strong work ethic and understand ethical considerations in biological research, 
which are both necessary for high-quality research. 
7. Develop healthy time management skills to plan and manage laboratory work as well as 
other miscellaneous research -associated demands on their time to effectively meet 
deadlines. 
 
4. Learning Outcomes 
 
Graduates will 
• Be introduced to cutting -edge, interdisciplinary research areas like Diagnostics & 
Therapeutics development, Instrumentation design & Development, Multi -omics 
Technologies & Applications, Biomedical Imaging& Image processing, Systems & Synthetic 
Biology and Biomaterials Engineering, Artificial Intelligence for biological applications  
• Be exposed to common problems that are prevalent in the domains of affordable healthcare, 
clean energy, safe environment, and sustainable agriculture, allowing them to innovat e and 
develop technological solutions for the same. 
• Receive effective, hands -on laboratory training as a part of laboratory courses and short -
term research projects that are designed to teach research methodology and common lab 
techniques. 
• Be introduced to  Patents and other intellectual property documents, the rights that they 
grant and necessary considerations while filing patents / technology that is protected by 
patents. 
• Develop their research communication skills by participating in seminars, journal cl ubs; 
manuscript writing and research grant writing workshops. 
• Receive training on building a work ethic by being a part of research groups working 
towards a common goal. Graduates will also appreciate the ethical and safety considerations 
while conducting biomedical research. 
• Be taught how to prioritize items on their schedule and how to budget time across the 
spectrum of activities including research and other necessary tasks. 
330 
 
5. Topic Clouds 
5.1 Master Topic Cloud - Course Overview 
 
 
5.2 Sub-Cloud - 1 - Bioimaging 
 
 
 
  

331 
 
5.3 Sub-Cloud - 2 - Omics 
 
5.4 Sub-Cloud - 3 - Biosensors 
 
 
 
 
  

332 
 
5.5 Sub-cloud - 4 - Systems Biology 
 
 
5.6 Sub-Cloud - 5 - Biomaterial Engineering 
 
 
  

333 
 
 
 
5.7 Sub-Cloud - 6- Bioenergy & Environment technologies  
 
 

334 
 
6.  M. Tech. Bioscience and Bioengineering Proposed Course structure 
 
Cat Course Title L-T-P Credits  Cat Course Title L-T-P Credits 
I Semester   II Semester 
C 
BBL7XX0: 
Introduction to 
OMICS Technologies  
2-0-0 2 
 
C BBL7XX0: Systems 
Biology 3-0-2 4 
C 
BBL7XX1: Bioimaging 
Instrumentation and 
Acquisition  
 
2-0-2 3 
 
C 
BBL7XX1: Types of 
Biosensors & their 
Characterization 
EE7XX2: 
Microfabrication 
Technologies, 
Interfacing and Read 
Out Electronics  
2-0-0 2 
C 
BBL7XX0: 
Biomaterials 
Engineering 
3-0-0 3 
 
C CS7XX2: Bioimage 
Computing 1-0-0 1 
C 
MAL7XX1: Statistical 
Techniques  
MAL7XX2: Advanced 
Statistical Techniques 
1-0-0 
 
 
2-0-0 
3 
 
C BBP7XX2: Statistics 
and Data Analysis Lab 0-0-2 1 
PE Program Elective-1 3-0-0 3  PE Program Elective-2 1-0-0 1 
NG Technical 
Communication 
1-0-0 1  PE Program Elective-3 3-0-0 3 
     PE Program Elective-4 3-0-0 3 
     NG Innovation and IP 
Management  
1-0-0 1 
Total (Graded + Non-graded) 15  Total (Graded + Non-graded) 16 
III Semester  IV Semester 
OE Open Elective-1 3-0-0 3  OE Open Elective-2 3-0-0 3 
PE 
Program Elective-5 
 
 
 
3-0-0 3 
 
TH Project-2 0-0-20 10 
PE Program Elective-6 3-0-0 3  NG Professional Ethics 1-0-0 1 
335 
 
PE Program Elective-7 1-0-0 1 
     
TH Project-1 0-0-12 6      
NG Systems Engineering 
and Project 
Management 
1-0-0 1      
Total (Graded + Non-graded) 17  Total (Graded + Non-graded) 14 
 
6.1 Credit Distribution 
 
Course Type Credits 
Program Core (C) 19 
Program Elective (PE) 17 
Open Elective (OE) 6 
Project 16 
Non-Graded  4 
Total (Graded + Non-Graded) 62 (58 + 4) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
336 
 
6.2 M. Tech. Program in Bioscience & Bioengineering - Elective Sets  
 
Students must complete a minimum of 9 credits from one Program Elective Set. Six credits may be 
completed from other PE Set. A student can opt for any two of the given elective sets. Students 
may opt for Open Electives from anywhere in the institute. 
 
Program Elective Set 1 - Bioimaging & Health Informatics 
BBL7XX0 Fundamentals of Neuroscience [3-0-0] 
BBL7XX0 Principles of Drug Development [3-0-0] 
BBL7XX0 Introduction to Chemical Biology [3-0-0] 
CSL7XX0 Digital Image Analysis [3-0-0] 
CSL7XX0 Machine Learning-1 [3-0-0] 
CSLEEL7XX0 Image Sensor Design and Applications [3-0-0]  
PH7XX0 Introduction to Medical Physics fractal 1 & 3 [2-0-0] 
 
Program Elective Set 2- Multi-omics  
BBL7XX1 Omics Databases [1-0-0] 
     MAL7XX0 Introduction to Data Science [1-0-0]  
CSL7XX2 Data Management [1-0-0]  
BBL7XX0 Proteomics Data Analysis [2-0-0] 
BBL7XX0 Microbial Genomes & Microbiomes [3-0-0] 
BBL7XX0 RNA Sequencing Data Analysis [3-0-0] 
BBL7XX0 Microarray Data Analysis [2-0-0] 
BBL7XX0 Metabolomics [3-0-0] 
BBL7XX0 Algorithms in Biology [3-0-0] 
 
Program Elective Set 3- Biological systems & Biosensors 
BBL7XX0 Disease Processes diagnostics & therapeutics [3-0-0] 
BBL7XX0 Quantitative Physiology: systems and controls of the human machine  [3-0-0] 
BBP7XX0 Quantitative Physiology lab [0-0-2] 
BBL7XX0 Cell and Molecular Biology [3-0-0] 
BBL7XX0 Sensory-neural systems [3-0-0] 
337 
 
BBL7XX3 Visual perception [1-0-0]  
BBL7XX2 Auditory perception: from cell to signal [1-0-0] 
BBL7XX1 Synaptic communication: function and dysfunction [1-0-0] 
BBL7XX0 Immunodiagnostics and therapeutics [2-0-2] 
BBL7XX0 Cardiovascular Physiology:  Signals, systems and controls 
BBL7XX1 Microbes as sensors [1-0-0] 
MEL7XXO Microfluidics technologies [3-0-0] 
CSL7XX0 Measurement in remote healthcare [1-0-0] 
CSL7XX0 Analog & Interfacing Circuits [3-0-0] 
CYL6XX0 Biophysical Techniques: Theory and applications [3-0-0] 
MEL7XX0 Fluid Flow in Biological Processes [2-0-0] 
 
Program Elective Set 4 – Systems Biology   
BBL7XX0 Synthetic Biology [3-0-0] 
BBL7XX0 Systems Biology in Personalized Genomics [3-0-0] 
BBL7XX0 RNA Sequencing Data Analysis [2-0-0] 
BBL7XX0 Flux Balance Analysis [3-0-0] 
BBL7XX0 Immunotechnology [3-0-0] 
CYL6XX1 Thermodynamics [1-0-0] 
CYL6XX3 Chemical Kinetics [1-0-0] 
MAL6XX0 Ordinary Differential Equations [3–0–0] 
MAL7XX0 Numerical Methods for PDE [1-0-0] 
Program Elective Set 5 – Biomaterials Engineering 
BBL7XX0 Biophysics [2-0-0] 
BBL7XX0 Biomechanics [2-0-0] 
BBL7XX0 Tissue Engineering & Medical devices and Implants [3-0-0] 
BBL7XX0 Selected topics in Biomaterials Engineering [1-0-0] 
MT7LXX0 Principles of Engineering Material Selection 3-0-0 [3] 
MTL7XX0 Computational material Engineering [3-0-0] 
Program Elective Set 6 – Bioenergy & Environmental Technologies 
BBL7XX0 Environmental Microbiology [2-0-0] 
338 
 
BBL7XX0 Environmental Biotechnology and Bioremediation [3-0-0] 
BB7XX0 Bioenergy Systems [3-0-0] 
BB7XX0 Bio-electrochemical Systems [2-0-0] 
MEL7XX0 Water Energy nexus [3-0-0] 
MEL7XX0 Soil and Water Conservation engineering [3-0-0] 
MT7XX0 Industrial waste: control & utilization [3-0-0] 
 
 
6.3 List of Laboratory courses  
6.3.1. Core Labs: 
Bioimaging lab 
Systems Biology lab 
Statistics and Data Analysis lab 
 
6.3.2. Elective Labs: 
Quantitative Physiology lab 
Artificial Intelligence in bioengineering lab 
Immunodiagnostics and therapeutics [2-0-2] 
 
                                                               
  
339 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Compulsory Courses / Fractals 
  
340 
 
Title Bioimaging Number BBL7XX1 
CSL7XX2  
Department Biosciences & Bioengineering and 
Computer Science & Engineering 
L-T-P [C] 3-0-2 [4] 
Offered for M. Tech; PhD Program Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
The Instructors will provide students with fundamentals of bioimaging 
instrumentations, image processing and image analysis with emphasis on problems in 
the field of healthcare, agriculture and environment. 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to acquire basic knowledge and 
understanding of microscopic imaging and their applications in  bioscience and 
bioengineering. 
 
Contents  
BBL7XX1 Instrumentation & Acquisition (2-0-2):  
(fractal 1) Image Formation: Lenses; Optical aberrations, Koehler illumination; 
Diffraction; Point spread function; Resolution. (5 lectures) 
Contrast Imaging Based Microscopy : Bright & Dark field, Phase contrast; Polarization; 
DIC, Fluorescent Probes & Proteins; Confocal; TIRF; Super-resolution (13 lectures) 
Image Acquisition & Analysis: Cameras; Detect ors; Basic Bio image analysis  (5 
lectures) 
Imaging Modalities -X-rays, Magnetic and Gamma -rays in imaging and therapeutics, 
application of imaging in the field of biosciences (5 lectures) 
Laboratory: Demonstration of microscopic imaging principles, contras t based 
microscopy techniques, Fluorescence based imaging, biological sample preparation & 
imaging, Image detectors, Bio image analysis, Biomedical Instrumentations, 
assignments on Bioimaging tools & techniques 
 
CS7XX2 Bioimage computing (1-0-0):  
(fractal 2) Reconstruction: Mathematical models of image regularity, random fields, 
practical data sampling and acquisition schemes (4 lectures) 
Restoration: Deconvolution, degradation models for corrupted and missing data, 
Bayesian graphical modelling and inferen ce, regression methods for filtering of 
bioimages (4 lectures) 
341 
 
 
Image segmentation, delineation & classification: Clustering, graph partitioning, 
classification, mixture models, expectation maximization, variational methods using 
geometric and statistical modelling, computer aided diagnosis (4 lectures) 
Registration: Deformation models, optimization algorithms, 2D -3D registration, multi -
modal registration (2 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Murphy D.B., Fundamentals of Light Microscopy and Electronic Imaging, John Wile y 
& Sons, Inc., 2nd edition 
    Bankman, I., (2009), Handbook of Medical Image Processing and Analysis, 2nd 
Edition, Academic Press. 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Basic of Light Microscopy & Imaging (The zeiss guide) 
 
Preparatory Course Material  
1. Debdoot Sheet, Bioimaging, NPTEL Course Material, Indian Institute of Technology 
Kharagpur, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/108105091/ 
2. Bishop, C., (2006), Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, Springer. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
342 
 
Title Introduction to Omics Technologies Number BBL7XX0 
Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P 
[C] 
2–0–0  [2] 
Offered for M.Tech.  Type Elective  
Prerequisite Nil   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce various technologies and relevant instrumentation applicable in genomics and 
transcriptomics research 
2. Introduce the instrumentation and various technologies applicable in proteome analyses 
and provide context for generation and analyses of proteome data 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Identify the right technology and method to be used in biological experiment design 
involving genomics and transcriptomics 
2. Choose the correct proteomics technology and supporting ins trumentation to answer  a 
specific biological question 
Contents 
Genomics & Transcriptomics Technologies: Cell lysis & nucleic acid extraction; quality 
control; conventional nucleic acid sequencing; next -generation sequencing technologies 
& instrumentation, fragmentation, size selection & purification strategies; single 
molecule real-time sequencing technology; multiplexing strategies; strategies for aiding 
in analyses of data; microarray fabrication, hybridization &  scanning equipment ( 14 
Lectures ) 
Proteomics technologies: Protein extraction, fractionation, separation & purification, protein 
sequencing, isoelectric focusing, 1D & 2D gel electrophoresis based approaches, gel 
imaging equipment & analysis software, mass spectrometry for gel based proteomics, 
gel-independent separation & mass spectrometry methods, tandem mass spectrometry, 
quantitative proteomics (14 Lectures) 
 Textbook 
1.  Lesk A., (2017), Introduction to Genomics, 3rd Edition, Oxford University Press 
2. Lovric, J., (2011), Introducing Proteomics: From Concepts to Sample Separation, Mass 
Spectrometry and Data Analysis. 11th Edition, Wiley-Blackwell. 
 Reference Books 
1.  Pevsner J., (2015), Bioinformatics and Functional Genomics, 3 rd Edition, Wiley 
Blackwell. 
2.  Thangadurai D., Sangeetha  J., (2015), Genomics and Proteomics: Principles, 
Technoogies & applications, 1st Edition, CRC Press 
343 
 
3.  Twyman R., (2013), Principles of Proteomics, 2nd Edition, CRC Press 
4.  Conn P.M., [Ed.] (2003), Handbook of Proteomic Methods, Springer 
 Self-Learning Material 
1. Vikash Kumar Dubey, Proteomics & Genomics , NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Biosciences & Bioengineering, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/102103017/ 
2. S. Ganesh, Functional Genomics, NPTEL Course Material, Indian Institute of Technology 
Kanpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/102104056/ 
3. Sanjeeva Srivastava,  Proteomics: Principles and Techniques , NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Biosciences & Bioengineering, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/102101007/6 
 
  
344 
 
 
Title Biomaterials engineering Number BBL7XX0 
Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite None   
Objective 
The Instructor will: 
1.  inspire future potential of bioengineering discipline 
2. provide cutting edge knowledge and applications of biomaterials in tissue engineering, drug 
delivery, biomechanics and reconstitution various biological events 
Learning Outcome 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
understand how biomaterials are useful for various biotechnological and bioengineering 
applications 
Contents 
Background and definition of biomaterials: classes of materials used biotechnological 
applications and in medicine: polymers, metals, ceramics, natural materials and composites, 
biodegradable polymers in medicine: polymers, liposomes, hydrogels, silicone biomaterials 
and medical fibers, degradation of materials in the biological environment, types of polymer 
degradation. Influence of polymer properties on degradation, influence of biological 
environment on polymer degradation (14 lectures) 
Surface engineering of biomaterials: biological testing of biomaterials: in vitro assessment of 
materials for tissue compatibility, in vivo assessment of tissue compatibility. Host reactions to 
biomaterials and their evaluations, the role of adsorbed proteins in tissue response to 
biomaterials. Cell, extra cellular matrix, and tissue interactions with biomaterials, 
inflammation, wound healing and foreign body response to biomaterials. Immune response to 
foreign materials. Toxicity, tumor genesis and biomaterials (14 lectures) 
Microscopes for monitoring biomaterials and their dynamics: tirf and confocal, applications in 
drug delivery and nanomedicine, bioengineering concept to reconstitute cell like micro-
chambers: flow-chambers and artificial cell, bioengineered platform for monitoring 
microtubule dynamics, bioengineered platform for monitoring microtubule motility and 
organization, bioengineered platform for monitoring microtubule force, reconstitution of 
kinesin transport using engineered biomaterials, applications in brain injury, repairing and 
future applications (14 lectures) 
Textbook 
Latest Research articles (ChemBioChem, Molecular Biosystem, AngewChem, ACS Chemical 
Biology, JACS, ChemComm, ACS Chemical Neuroscience etc.) 
Self Learning Material  
None 
Preparatory Course Material 
None 
  
345 
 
 
Title Statistical Techniques, Advanced Statistical 
Techniques 
Number MAL7XX0 
MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics  L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Nil   
Objectives:  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide training in the analysis of the data from high dimensional biological data 
2. Familiarizing the participants with the use of statistical tools and methodologie s for 
analysing biological data 
Learning outcomes:  
The students are expected to: 
1. Analyse data, be able to decide which data analysis tool to use 
2. Implement statistical methods on real datasets       
Contents 
MAL7XX1: Statistical Techniques [1-0-0] 
(fractal 1) probability models and sampling techniques, tests of hypoth eses, stochastic process 
(14 lecture) 
MAL7XX0:  Advanced Statistical Techniques [2-0-0] 
(fractal 2) estimation, mixture models and latent models, association and correlation analysis, 
regression analysis (28 lectures) 
Textbook 
1. Casella,G. and Berger,R., (2002), Statistical Inference, Cengage Learning. 
2. Montogomery,D.C., Peck,E.A. and Vining,G.G., (2012), Introduction to Linear Regression 
Analysis, Wiley. 
3. Medenhall,W., Beaver,R.J., Beaver, B.M., (2013), Introduction to Probability and Statistics, 
Cengage Learning. 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Rosner,B., (2000), Fundamentals of Biostatistics, 5th Edition, Thomson Brooks/Cole. 
2. Johnson,R.A., (2000), Probability and Statistics for Engineers, 6th Edition, Prentice Hall. 
3. DeGroot,M.H., Schervish, M.J., (2002), Probability and Statistics , 3rd Rev. Edition, Addison -
Wesley. 
Preparatory Course Material Sen, S., Introduction to Biostatistics, NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Biosciences and Bioengineering, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, 
https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc18_bt21/preview 
 
  
346 
 
Title Statistics and Data Analysis Lab Number BBP7XX0 
Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 0–0–2 [2] 
Offered for M.Tech Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Nil   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide training in the analysis of the data from high dimensional biological data 
2. Familiarizing the participants with the use of statistical tools and methodologie s for 
analysing biological data 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
1. Analyse data, be able to decide which data analysis tool to use 
2. Learn the latest programming languages  
3. Implement statistical methods on real datasets       
Laboratory Experiments 
programming using pyspark/R, statistical modelling using real datasets, identification of 
biomarkers, application of ANOVA, genome -wide association analysis studies (linear and 
logistic regression), meta-analysis, population stratification techniques, survival analysis 
Textbook 
1. Casella,G. and Berger,R.L., (2002), Statistical Inference, 2nd Edition, Cengage Learning. 
2. Montogomery,D.C., Peck,E.A. and Vining,G.G., (2012), Introduction to Linear Regression 
Analysis, 4th Edition, Wiley. 
3. Medenhall,W., Beaver, R.J., Beaver, B.M., (2013), Introduction to Probability and Statistics , 
14th Edition, Cengage Learning. 
Self Learning Material 
1. Rosner, B., (2000), Fundamentals of Biostatistics, 5th Edition, Thomson Brooks/Cole. 
2. Johnson, R. A., (2000), Probability and Statistics for Engineers, 6th Edition, Prentice Hall. 
3. DeGroot, M. H., Schervish, M. J., (2002), Probability and Statistics , 3 rd Rev. Edition, 
Addison-Wesley. 
Preparatory Course Material 
Sen, S., Introduction to Biostatistics, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Biosciences and 
Bioengineering, Indian Insti tute of Technology Bombay, 
https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc18_bt21/preview 
 
  
347 
 
Title Systems Biology Number BBL7XX0 
Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–2 [4] 
Offered for M.Tech. 1st Year Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide an introduction to cellular and level systems biology with an emphasis on 
mathematical 347nalyse347r, synthetic biology, 347nalyse347r of genetic networks, 
genetic and metabolic engineering, and thermodynamics.  
2. Cellular systems include genetic switches and oscillators, network motifs, genetic network 
evolution, and cellular decision-making.  
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Implement knowledge of important concepts related to the mathematical modelling of 
complex systems, especially metabolic networks, protein interaction networks and gene 
regulatory networks. 
2. To apply them to model the 347nalyse347r of biological systems as well as develop 
strategies for manipulating them. 
Contents  
BBL7XX1 Mathematical Modelling & Simulations [1 -0-0]: (fractal 1)  Introduction to 
Modelling in Biomedicine, ODE 347nalyse347r of biochemical networks and cell populations, 
Boolean 347nalyse347r of biochemical networks, Agent -based 347nalyse347r of cell 
populations ad tissues (14 lectures) 
BBL7XX2 Graph theory & Networks [1 -0-0]: (fractal 2) Networks  and  graph  theory, 
Network Measure, Scale-free  networks, Biological  networks, Modularity (14 lectures) 
BBL7XX3 Genetic & Metabolic Engineering [1 -0-0]: ( fractal 3)  Genetic Engineering, 
Metabolic Engineering (14 lectures) 
Laboratory 
Practical exercise of a mathematical model in the context of biological systems. 
Network visualization tools: Cytoscape and Gephi. 
Software packages: Boost, network, igraph for graph-theoretic computations 
Textbook 
1.Brian P. I., (2013) Mathematical Modeling in Systems Biology: An Introduction, MIT Press  
2.Newman M. E. J. (2010), Networks: An Introduction, Oxford University Press. 
3.Nesbeth D. N. (2016), Synthetic Biology Handbook, CRC Press. 
Self Learning Material 
1. Klipp E (2009) Systems biology : a textbook. Wiley-VCH 
 
348 
 
 
2. Department of Biological Engi neering, MIT, https://be.mit.edu/research-areas/systems-
biology 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 
https://nptel.ac.in/noc/individual_course.php?id=noc18-bt22 
 
  
349 
 
 
Title Biosensors Number BBL7XX1 
EEL7XX2 
 
Department Bioscience & Bio-engineering and Electrical 
Engineering 
L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
 The Instructor will:  Provide background on biosensors, their types, fabrication, 
characterization, & applications. 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Understand the design and working of various biosensors  
2.  to design a sensor based on the figures of meritContents  
BBL7XX1: Types of biosensors and their characterization [1-0-0] 
(fractal 1) Introduction to biosensors, their applications, importance & relevance in the field of 
healthcare, agriculture and environment monitoring (4 lectures) 
Basic principles and types of sensors: Protein/antibody-based sensors: surface chemistry. 
Electrochemical and optical sensors, Redox -enzyme, Optical methods: UV/Vis/I R, 
fluorescence, luminescence, fibre optics, surface plasmon resonance, and mass based 
sensors Analytical methods chromatography, spectrophotometry, electrochemical 
characterization (10 lectures) 
EEL7XX2: Micro -fabrication technologies, sensor signals, int erfacing and read out 
electronics  [1-0-0] 
(fractal 2) Introduction to micro -system fabrication technologies : optical lithography, etching, 
metallization, CVD, LIGA, DRIE, micro -molding, surface and bulk micromachining and 
packaging. Case studies related t o high aspect ratio structures e.g.    micro -channels, 
Microarrays, Micro-reactors, microfabricated PCR, lab on chip, Biosensor interfacing: sources of 
noise, interfacing circuitry and read out electronics  (14 Lectures) 
Textbook: 
1. Anthony, T., Isao, K., Wilson, G.S., (2017) Biosensors: Fundamentals and applications , 
Oxford University Press. 
Reference book: 
1. Benica, F-G., (2012) Chemical Sensors and Biosensors-Fundamentals and applications, 12th 
edition, John-Wiley & Sons Ltd. 
2. Tai-Ran Hsu, (2017),  MEMS & Microsystems Design and Manufacture , Indian Edition, Tata 
McGraw-Hill 
 
Self Learning Material 1.Dr. Mainak Das, Department of Bioscience & Bioengineering, IIT 
Kanpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/102104062/19 
1. Dr. K Uma Mahshwari, Sastra University https://nptel.ac.in/courses/118106019/ 
 
350 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Program Elective Set 1 
 
Bioimaging & Health Informatics 
  
351 
 
Title Fundamentals of Neuroscience  Number BBL7xx0 
Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech Type Elective 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide introduction to neuroanatomy for engineers and cognitive neuro anatomists  
2. Provide Hands -on training is provided in the fundamentals of neuroanatomist structures 
and functions. Understanding of which has diverse applications in disease diagnostics by 
imaging. 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are e xpected to have the ability to:  understand areas of application based 
on the understanding of neuroanatomist structures and their association in some diseases.  
Contents 
Why are we interested in the brain: Diseases of the nervous systems (14 lectures): 
Schizophrenia, Depression, Diseases of Neural Degeneration: Alzheimer‟s, Senile 
Dementia of the Alzheimer‟s Type, Diagnosed as memory loss with inability to 
complete activities of daily living, Macroanatomy: Degeneration of higher cortices, 
Microanatomy: Amyloid plaques and tangles,  Lou Gehrig/ALS, diseases of the Basal 
Ganglia, Huntington‟s, Parkinson‟s, Plasticity and Disease, 
Diseases of Deafferentation (7lectures), Multiple Sclerosis, Phantom pain/central pain, 
Diseases of Vasculature, stroke, Migraine. Diseases and Neural Dynami cs, Language 
Specific Learning Deficit, Association of Structure and Function, 
Cerebellar anatomy and its disorders  (7lectures): motor disorders, Stumbling gate, 
psychiatric disorders, Pitch discrimination, language ability, Tactile perception, Deficits 
are not Trivially Localized, 
Deficits of NT systems (14 lectures): Depression, Schizophrenia, Phantom Limb, 
Alzheimer‟s and the Brain 
 Textbook 
1.  Kandel,E., (2012), Principles of Neural Science, 5th Edition, Elsevier 
2. Zigmond M (2012), Fundamental Neuroscience, 4th Edition Elsevier 
Reference Books 
1.   Lodish B, Kaiser K (2016), Molecular Cell Biology, 8th Edition, WH Freeman  
Online Course Material 
1. Constantine-Paton M, 9.013J / 7.68J Cell and Molecular Neurobiology , Spring 2008, MIT 
OpenCourseWare Massachusetts Institute of Technology, https://ocw.mit.edu. License: 
Creative Commons 
352 
 
Title Digital Image Analysis Number CSL7XX0 
 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce the origin and formation of digital imaging. 
2. Develop the understanding of different types of image processing and analysis for 
different purposes. 
3. Show how to develop modular systems for image analysis through hands -on application 
development. 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Enhance image in spatial and frequency domain. 
2. Implement various aspects of image segmentation, compression, and content analysis. 
Contents  
Digital Image Fundamentals: Image 352nalyse352r, Sampling and Quantization, Imaging 
Geometry, Digital Geometry, Image Acquisition Systems, Different types of digital images. (4)  
Bilevel Image Processing: Basic concepts of digital distances, distance  transform, medial axis 
transform, component 352nalyse352r, Histogram of grey level images, Optimal thresholding. 
(5) 
Images Enhancement: Point processing, enhancement in spatial domain, enhancement in 
frequency domain. (5) 
Detection of edges and lines in 2D i mages: First order and second order edge operators,multi -
scale edge detection, Canny‟s edge detection algorithm, Hough transform for detecting lines 
and curves. (5) 
Color Image Processing: Color Representation, Laws of color matching, chromaticity diagram,  
color enhancement, color image segmentation, color edge detection. (5) 
Image compression: Lossy and lossless compression schemes, prediction based compression 
schemes, vector quantization, sub-band encoding schemes, JPEG compression standard. (6) 
Segmentation: Segmentation of grey level images, Watershed algorithm for segmenting grey 
level image. (5) 
Morphology: Dilation, erosion, opening, closing, hit and miss transform, thinning, extension to 
grey scale morphology. (4) 
Feature Detection: Fourier descriptors, shape features, object matching/features(3) 
 
353 
 
 
Textbook: 
1. Gonzalez and Woods, Digital Image Processing, Prentice-Hall. 
2. Fundamentals of Digital Image Processing by Anil K. Jain. 
Self Learning Material  
NPTEL: Digital Image Processing 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117105079/ 
 
  
354 
 
 
Title Machine Learning-1 Number CSL7XX0 
 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. 1st Year, Ph.D. 1st Year Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite None   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide motivation and understanding of the need and importance of Machine Learning in 
today‟s world 
2. Provide details about various algorithms in Machine Learning 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Develop a sense of Machine Learning in the modern context, and independently work on 
problems relating to Machine Learning 
2. Design and program efficient algorithms related to Machine Learning, train model s, 
conduct experiments, and deliver ML-based applications 
Contents  
CSL7XX1: Machine Learning I: Supervised Learning 1-0-0[1] 
Introduction: Motivation, Different types of learning, Linear regression, Logistic regression (2 
lectures) 
Gradient Descent: Intro duction, Stochastic Gradient Descent, Subgradients, Stochastic 
Gradient Descent for risk minimization (2 lectures) 
Support Vector Machines: Hard SVM, Soft SVM, Optimality conditions, Duality, Kernel trick, 
Implementing Soft SVM with Kernels (4 lectures) 
Decision Trees: Decision Tree algorithms, Random forests (2 lectures) 
Neural Networks: Feedforward neural networks, Expressive power of neural networks, SGD and 
Backpropagation (3 lectures) 
Model selection and validation: Validation for model selection, k -fold cross-validation, Training-
Validation-Testing split, Regularized loss minimization (1 lectures) 
CSL7XX2: Machine Learning I: Unsupervised Learning and Generative Models 1 -0-
0[1] 
Nearest Neighbour: k-nearest neighbour, Curse of dimensionality (1 lecture) 
Clustering: Linkage -based clustering algorithms, k -means algorithm, Spectral clustering (3 
lectures) 
355 
 
 
Dimensionality reduction: Principal Component Analysis, Random projections, Compressed 
sensing (2 lectures) 
Generative Models: Maximum likelihood estimat or, Naive Bayes, Linear Discriminant Analysis, 
Latent variables and Expectation-maximization algorithm, Bayesian learning (5 lectures) 
Feature Selection and Generation: Feature selection, Feature transformations, Feature learning 
(3 lectures) 
CSL7XX3: Mach ine Learning I: Computational Learning Theory and Deep Neural 
Networks 1-0-0[1] 
Statistical Learning Framework: PAC learning, Agnostic PAC learning, Bias -complexity tradeoff, 
No free lunch theorem, VC dimension, Structural risk minimization, Adaboost (7 lectures) 
Foundations of Deep Learning: DNN, CNN, RNN, Autoencoders (7 lectures) 
Textbook: 
1. Shalev-Shwartz,S., Ben -David,S., (2014), Understanding Machine Learning: From Theory 
to Algorithms, Cambridge University Press 
Reference Books: 
2. Mitchell Tom (1997). Machine Learning, Tata McGraw-Hill 
Self Learning Material  
3. Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, 
https://see.stanford.edu/Course/CS229 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
356 
 
Title Image Sensor Design and Applications Number EEL7XX0 
 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. IV, M. Tech, Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Analog electronics   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce the design and analysis of CMOS image sensors. 
2. Explain the readout electronics behind the camera. 
3. Provide the knowledge of performance measures and tradeoffs  involved in the camera 
design. 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Design and develop CMOS image sensor including the sensing mechanism and signal chain 
of the camera. 
2. Implement different techniques required for high dynamic range camera, high frame rate,  
low noise camera, time of flight 3D cameras etc. 
Contents  
Introduction to photodetectors: Photodiode and photogate, photocurrent, dark current, 
quantum efficiency, spectral response and photo-conversion principles (5 Lectures). 
Introduction to Charge coupled devices and CMOS image sensors: Operation, performance 
metrics, noise and its types, sp atial resolution and modulation transfer function. Concept of 
exposure triangle including aperture, shutter speed and ISO, color filters, Bayer pattern, 
Shutters and its types, motion blur, hard and soft reset, Introduction to imaging optics (8 
Lectures). 
Readout electronics and image sensor characterization: Readout and its types, design tradeoffs 
and challenges, analysis of the signal path behind the camera, variable gain amplifiers, double 
sampling circuits, ADCs, reference circuits including BGR and LDO , clock generation circuits 
including PLL and delay elements, floor planning, placement and routing, image sensor 
characterization. Introduction to wire bonding, packaging, lens and color filters for product 
level design (15 Lectures). 
Emerging trends: Hig h speed cameras, high dynamic range cameras, 3D cameras for 
background light subtraction and depth estimation. Concepts of Polarization imaging, low light 
imaging, machine vision, backside illumination, stacked technology, target tracking (10 
Lectures). 
Color Processing: Color demosaicing, color correction and white balance (2 Lectures).  
Applications: Smart city,health care, autonomous vehicles, sports, motion detection, 
surveillance (2 Lectures). 
Textbook 
1. Jun Ohta, (2007), Smart CMOS Image sensors and Applications, CRC press. 
 
 
357 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. O. Yadid Pecht and R. E. Cummings (2004), CMOS imagers: From Photo transduction to 
Image processing, Springer. 
2. Image sensors blog http://image-sensors-world.blogspot.com/ 
Preparatory Course Material  
1. El Gamal, Abbas, and Helmy Eltoukhy (2005) “CMOS image sensors.” IEEE Circuits and 
Devices Magazine vol. 21, no. 3, pages 6-20.  
2. Fossum, Eric R. (1997) “CMOS image sensors: Electro nic camera -on-a-chip.” IEEE 
transactions on electron devices vol. 44. No. 10, pages 1689-1698. 
 
  
358 
 
 
Title Introduction to Medical Physics Number PHL7XX0 
 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The instructor will 
1. Introduce physics concepts and principles relevant for medicine and health 2. Provide the 
introduction of modern diagnostic tools and various technology to medical research and to 
the healthcare arena in general that is set to revolutionize the way we cure diseases. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
Aspects of physics with engineering for biological applications 
1. Contribution of physics in the development of medical diagnostics 
 
Contents  
PH7XX1 (Radiological imaging techniques) [1-0-0] 
(a) Physics in Medical research: Interaction of radiation with matter, Interaction of photons 
with tissues, molecules, cells and organs, Elastic and inelastic scattering, Thomson and 
Compton Scattering. (6 lectures) 
1. Radiological imaging: X-ray imaging and computerized Tomography (CT), Radioisotope 
imaging, Positron–emission Tomography, Introduction to the image analysis. (8 lectures) 
PH7XX3 (Physics in Therapeutics) [1 -0-0] (a) Plasma for Medicine: Introduction of low 
temperature plasma technology to medical research, plasma chem istry, fundamentals of non -
equilibrium plasmas and cell biology. Cold plasma applications in the inactivation of pathogens, 
anti-bacterial coatings, wound healing, electrosurgery, cancer treatment and dentistry. (10 
lectures) (b) Nuclear Medicine: Radioactivity, Production of radionuclides, Radiation therapy for  
cancer treatment. (4 lectures) 
Textbook 
1. Cho, Z -H., Jones, J. and Singh, M., Foundations of Medical Imaging, 1 st Edition Wiley 
Interscience, 1993 
2. Pryma, D. A., Nuclear Medicine, 1st Edition, Oxford University Press, 2015 
3. Murphy, D. B. and Davidson, M. W., Fundamental of Light Microscopy and Electronic 
Imaging, 2nd Edition, Wiley-Blackwell, 2012 
Reference Books 
1. Toyokuni, S., Ikehara, Y., Kikkawa, F. and Hori, M. (2018), Plasma Medical Science,  1st 
Edition, Academic Press. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
1. Department of Electrical Engg, IIT Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108105091/ 
359 
 
2. Jasanoff, A., MIT Open courseware, Noninvasive Imaging in Biology and Medicine, 
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/nuclear-engineering/22-56j-noninvasive-imaging-in-
biology-and 
medicine-fall-2005/index.htm. 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. Department of Physics, IIT Delhi, https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/115102017/. 
 
 
  
360 
 
Title Principles of Drug Discovery Number BBL7XX1 
CSL7XX1 
CSL7XX2 
Department Bioscience & Bioengineering and Computer 
Science and engineering 
L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [2] 
Offered for M.Tech Type Elective  
Prerequisite None   
 
Objective 
The Instructor will: 
1. focus on route of drug design and discovery 
 
Learning Outcome 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. understand the principles of drug design and development 
 
Contents 
BBL7XX1: Principles of Drug Discovery [1-0-0] 
(fractal 1) drug targets, pharmacokinetics, administration and dosing, drug testing: in vivo 
and in vitro, drug discovery: natural lead, synthetic lead, combinatorial synthesis, 
pharmacokinetics based drug design, chemical development, process development, toxicology, 
pharmacology, drug metabolism, clinical trials, commercialization (14 lectures) 
CSL7XX0: Machine Learning-1 [2-0-0] 
(fractal 2) introduction, gradient descent, support vector machines, decision trees, neural 
networks (14 lectures) 
(fractal 3) nearest neighbour, clustering, dimensionality reduction, generative models, feature 
selection and generation (14 lectures) 
Textbook 
1. Stromgaard,K., Krogsgaard-Larsen,P., Madsen,U., Drug Design and Discovery, 5th Edition, 
CRC Press  
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Department of Computer Science, Stanford University 
https://see.stanford.edu/Course/CS229 
Preparatory Course Material 
 
 
 
 
361 
 
Title Introductory Chemical Biology Number BBL7XX0 
Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech Type Elective  
Prerequisite None   
 
Objective 
The Instructor will: 
1. Build fundamental concept of interdisciplinary science, specially chemical biology 
 
Learning Outcome 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the importance of interdisciplinary sciences and its applications in 
bioengineering fields 
 
Contents 
Introduction: background and definition of chemical biology, overview of chemical 
biology, allied fields and their link with chemical biology, overview of protein structure 
and protein-protein interactions (14 lectures) 
Biomolecular-drug interaction: key discoveries in the field of chemical biology, few 
examples and journey through those discoveries, the use of unusual amino acids to 
probe biomolecular conformation, the use of novel fluorescence probe and 
applications, sirna as therapeutics, small molecule kinase inhibitors, gtp analogues as 
potential regulators for microtubule dynamics (14 lectures) 
Imaging: applications of small molecule as a probe for in vivo imaging, chemical tools 
for perturbation of protein-protein interactions, chemical platforms for protein-protein 
and protein-nucleic acid interactions (14 lectures) 
Textbook 
1. Chemical Biology: From Small Molecules to Systems Biology and Drug Design 
(Willey), Editor(s): Profs. Stuart L. Schreiber, Tarun M. Kapoor and Günther Wess 
Nature Chemical Biology, 2010, 6, 847-853 
Self Learning Material  
None 
Preparatory Course Material 
None 
 
 
 
 
 
362 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Program Elective Set 2 
 
Multi-’Omics’ 
 
  
363 
 
Title Omics Databases Number BBL 7XX0 
Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 
Offered for M.Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce the biological databases commonly encountered in omics research and will 
highlight how different data types are used across biology 
  
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Store / retrieve biological data in / from relevant databases and process it for analyses 
 
Contents 
Biological Databases: Sequence databases, gene expression databases, sequence read 
archives, peptide databases, metabolite libraries, phenomic databases, data file formats, 
conversion between formats, considerations for data submission to databases, 
considerations for using data retrieved from databases, data quality control, [data 
warehousing and integration, anonymizing data*] (14 lectures) 
Textbook 
1. Byron K., Herbert K.G., Wang J.T.L, (2016), Bioinformatics Database Systems, CRC Press 
2.  Srivastava C., (2019), Informatics in Proteomics, CRC Press 
Reference Books 
1. Bergeron B., (2016), Bioinformatics Computing, Pearson 
  
Self-Learning Material 
None 
*Will be covered by CSE Department 
 
  
364 
 
Title Introduction of Data Science  Number MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 
Offered for M.Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce the basics of data science and its underlying concepts. 
2. Introduce data processing, manipulation and cleaning techniques. 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Acquire familiarity with the basic concepts of data science. 
2. Distinguish between different kinds of data and data governance. 
3. Understand the preparation and processing of the data. 
 
Contents [14 Lectures]  Data preparation, Data pre -processing, Data Cleaning, Data 
Integration, Data Transformation, Data Reduction, Redundancy Removal, Data storage, 
Data Handling, Querying Data, Data Representation and Exploration, Big Data. 
Text Books 
1. Kotu, V. and Deshpand e, B. (2018) Data Science: Concepts and Practice, Morgan 
Kaufmann. 
2. Saltz, J.S. and Stanton, J.M. (2017) An Introduction to Data Science, SAGE 
Publications. 
3. Kelleher, J.D., and Tierney, B. (2018) Data Science, MIT Press. 
Reference Books 
1. Moreira, J., Carvalho, A. and Horvath, T. (2018) A General Introduction to Data 
Analytics, John Wiley & Sons. 
2. Mayer-Schonberger, V. and Cukier, K., (2013) Big data: The essential guide to work, 
life and learning in the age of insight, John Murray Publications. 
Online course Material 
Not Available 
 
  
365 
 
Title Data Management (Fractal of Software and 
Data Engineering) 
Number CSL7XX2 
Department CSE L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 
Offered for M.Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Discuss techniques to manage a large amount of data 
  
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Design complex end-to-end data pipeline for data processing 
2. Critically identify and use the tools for data handling and management 
Contents 
CSL7XX2 Data Management 1-0-0 [1] 
Data Management: Structured data, relational database management, unstructured data, 
semi-structured data, Nosql database management (mongodb), column database, graph 
database, XML, JSON, HDFS, Handling drift in data, sensor data reliability at software and 
algorithmic level, sensor data analysis techniques (14 lectures) 
Textbook 
1. Bass L., Clements P., Kazman R., (2012), Software Architecture in Practice, 3 rd edition, 
Addison-Wesley Professional 
2. Martin K., (2 017), Designing Data -Intensive Applications: The Big Ideas Behind 
Reliable, Scalable, and Maintainable Systems, 1st Edition, O‟Reilly Media 
Self Learning Material 
1. Tylor,R.N., Medvidovic,N. and Dashofy,E.M., (2014), Software Architecture Foundation: 
Theory and Practice, Wiley 
2.  
Preparatory Course Material 
1. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 
2. International Conference on Data Engineering 
 
  
366 
 
Title Microarray Data Analysis Number BBL7XX0 
Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 
Offered for M.Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide background to 366nalyse microarray technology/RNA sequencing gene expression 
data. 
2. Familiarize the students with the use of advanced tools and methodologies for 
366nalyse366r microarray/RNA seq expression data 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the structure of the data, the statistical procedures used to remove the 
inherent noise present in the data (pre-processing of the data) 
2. Decide which data analysis tool to use 
Contents 
DNA Microarray: Gene expression biology, DNA microarrays and their importance, types 
of microarrays - two-channel cDNA arrays, single -channel Affymetrix genechips, 
microarray platforms, Designing a microarray experiment-The basic steps 
Microarray Databases:  NCBI and microarray data management, GEO (Gene Expression 
Omnibus), Array Express, The benefits of GEO and Array Express. 
Microarray Data Normalization:  Importance of microarray data pre -processing, 
Background correction, Data normalization, Measuring dissimilarity of expression pattern 
using dissimilarity measures 
Microarray Data Analysis: Identification of differentially expressed genes- using statistical 
and computational approaches, Classifying samples from two populations using k -nearest 
366nalyse366r classifier, Support Vector Machines and their applications, For grouping 
co-expressed genes- Kmeans Clustering, Hierarchical Clustering. 
Visualization and Functional Analysis: Bio-molecular pathways, gene ontology, enrichment 
analysis, hypergeometric distribution, calculation of P -Value, hypothesis testi ng, multiple 
hypothesis testing 
Textbook 
1. Draghici, S., (2012), Statistics and Data Analysis for Microarrays Using R and 
Bioconductor, 2nd Edition, Chapman & Hal/CRC. 
  
Reference Books 
1. Knudsen, S., (2004), Guide to Analysis of DNA Microarray Data, John Wiley & Sons. 
2.  Stekel, D., (2002), Microarray Bioinformatics, Cambridge University Press. 
3. Draghic, S., (2002), Data Analysis tools for DNA Microarray , Chapma n and Hall/CRC 
Press. 
367 
 
Online Course Material 
1.  Srivastava, S., Microarray Data Analysis , Department of Bioscience and 
Bioengineering, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/102101054/35 
  
368 
 
 
Title RNA Sequencing Data Analysis Number BBL7XX0 
Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 2-0-0 [2] 
Offered for M.Tech. Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Illustrate the intricacies involved in choosing the right RNA sequencing platform and will 
highlight the key steps of data analysis   
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Analyse an RNA sequencing dataset and draw biological meaning from the data  
Contents  
Introduction to RNA Sequencing Data: Sequencing chemistries, choosing the right method 
for an application, principal considerations while designing an RNA sequencing experiment  
Quality Control:  Sequence quality scores, pr e-processing steps & considerations, FastQC, 
filtering & trimming of low -quality reads, detecting contaminants, removing adapters, red 
flags & troubleshooting 
Reference mapping : Alignment tools, assessment of alignment statistics, manipulating 
alignments, visualizing alignments 
De novo assembly : Transcriptome reconstruction & inherent complexities, pre -processing 
considerations for de novo assembly, de Bruijn graph, assembly tools, R & bioconductor for 
data analysis 
Gene expression analysis: Annotation, cou nting reads per transcript, differential gene 
expression, importance of biological & technical replicates, count distributions, 
normalization, visualizing differential gene expression, graphics & plot types 
Detecting Non -coding RNAs : Methods for detecting non-coding RNAs, sRNAs, miRNAs, 
piRNAs, endo-siRNAs, exo-siRNAs, snoRNAs, snRNAs 
Applications of RNA sequencing: Transcriptome response profiling, finding splice variants, 
detecting allele specific expression in disease 
Textbook  
1.  Korpelainen E., Tuimal a J., Somervuo P., Huss M., Wong G., (2015), RNA-Seq Data 
Analysis: A Practical Approach, CRC Press 
2.  Wang X., (2016), Next-Generation Sequencing Data Analysis, CRC Press 
Reference Books  
Review & research articles as prescribed by the Instructor 
Self-learning Material  None 
  
369 
 
Title Algorithms in Biology Number BBL7XX0 
Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech Type Elective  
Prerequisite Nil   
 
Objectives:  
1. To  develop  an  understanding of   the  main  algorithmic  approaches  used  in  solving 
computational problems that arise in the analysis of biomolecular data (such as 
DNA/RNA/amino acid sequences, mass spectra of proteins, whole genomes, or gene 
expression levels). 
 
Learning outcomes:  
The students are expected to: 
1.  Understand various algorithms related to biological data analysis.  
2.  Develop new efficient algorithm to solve biological data.       
Contents 
Algorithms and Complexity: What is an algorithm?, Biological Algorithm versus Computer 
Algorithms, The change problem, Correct versus Incorrect Algorithms, Recursive 
Algorithms, Iterative versus Recursive Algorithms, Fast vs Slow Algorithms, Big -O 
Notation, Algorithm Design Techniques, Tractable versus Intractable Problems (10 
lectures) 
Greedy Algorithms: Genome Rearrangements, Sorting by Reversals, Approximation 
Algorithms, Breakpoint: A different face of greed, A greedy approach to motif finding (10 
lectures) 
Dynamic programming algorithms: The power of DNA sequence comparison, the change 
problem revisited, the manhattan tourist problem, edit distance and alignments, longest 
common subsequences, global sequence alignment, local sequence alignment, alignment 
and gap penalties, multiple alignment, gene prediction. (10 lectures) 
Clustering and Tre es:  Gene expression analysis, Hierarchical Clustering, k-means 
clustering, clustering and corrupted cliques, evolutionary trees, distance based tree 
reconstruction, Evolutionary trees and hierarchical clustering, small parsimony problem, 
large parsimony problem (7 lectures) 
Gene selection algorithms: SAM, eBayes, Limma, CFS, mRMR, MRMS [5 lectures] 
Textbook 
1. Jones N. C. ,Pevzner   P. A.  (2014), An Introduction to Bioinformatics Algorithms, MIT 
Press 
Reference Books 
1. Mitra S. and Acharya T. (2003), Data Mining: Multimedia, Soft Computing, and 
Bioinformatics, New York: John Wiley 
2.  Mitra S., Datta S., Perkins T. and Michailidis G. (2008), Introduction to Machine Learning 
and Bioinformatics, New York: Chapman & Hall/CRC Press. 
Online Course Material : None 
 
370 
 
Title Proteomics Data Analysis Number BBL7XX0 
Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [0] 
Offered for M.Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce the biological databases commonly encountered in omics research and will 
highlight how different data types are used across biology 
  
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Store / retrieve biological data in / from relevant databases and process it for analyses 
  
Contents 
Mass spectrometry for proteomics: Basic principles, ionization methods, mass analyzers & 
mass spectrometers, analysis of MS data, analysis of MS/MS data, simple vs complex 
samples (18 lectures) 
Case studies: Qualitative proteomics, differential proteomics,  detecting post-translational 
modifications, interactomics (10 lectures) 
Textbook 
1. Lovric, J., (2011), Introducing Proteomics: From Concepts to Sample Separation, Mass 
Spectrometry and Data Analysis. 11th Edition, Wiley-Blackwell. 
  
Reference Books 
1.  Twyman R., (2013), Principles of Proteomics, 2nd Edition, CRC Press 
2.  Conn P.M., [Ed.] (2003), Handbook of Proteomic Methods, Springer 
Online Course Material 
1. Sanjeeva Srivastava,  Proteomics: Principles and Techniques,  NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Biosciences & Bioengineering, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/102101007/6  
 
  
371 
 
 
Title Microbial Genomes & Microbiomes Number BBL7XX0 
Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
  Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Illustrate the various methods applicable in the generation, analysis and interpretation of 
microbial genome sequencing data 
2. Outline the methods involved  in determining the microbiome and assessing its importance 
in health, environment and agriculture 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Determine the best possible methods to determine the sequence of bacterial genomes 
with naturally varying properties. 
2. Be acquainted with the microbiomes associated with specific niches, methods to study 
them and infer what it means to have a specific microbiome in a given environment 
Contents 
Introduction to microbial genomes: Prokaryotic genome anatomy, Extrachromosomal 
elements, Separation (4 lectures) 
Genome sequencing:  Timeline of DNA sequencing technologies, Explosive abundance of 
Genomic Data, Problems with genome assembly and solutions, Coding sequence 
prediction, Methods of gene prediction, Pathways and metabolic models (8 lectures) 
Functional & Comparative Genomics: Experimental annotation, Gene expression profiling, 
Interactome, Genome alignment, Genomic phylogeny, Pan-genomics (10 lectures) 
Genome evolution: Genomic islands, Genome plasticity, Resistome, Molecular epidemiology, 
Minimal genome concept, Synthetic genomes, Genomic alterations (10 lectures) 
Microbiomes: Introducing metagenomics, detecting unculturable microbes, the human 
microbiome project, 16S based microbiome analysis, metagenome shotgun sequencing, 
importance of the microbiome in health, applications of microbiome sequencing i n 
agriculture & the environment 
Textbook 
1.  Brown T.A. (2007) Genomes 3, Blackwell publications 
2. Fraser C.M., Read T.D., Nelson K.E., (2004), Microbial Genomes, Humana Press 
Reference Books 
2. Review & Research articles as prescribed by the Instructor 
 
Online Course Material Ganesh S., Functional Genomics,  NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Biological Sciences and Bioengineering, Indian Institute of Technology, 
Kanpur, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/102104056/ 
 
372 
 
Title Metabolomics Number BBL7XX0 
Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [1] 
Offered for M.Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce metabolomics as a discipline highlighting some methods for data generation, 
analysis and interpretation 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Choose the appropriate method to qualitatively or quantitatively analyze  the metabolome 
from different biological samples 
  
Contents 
Metabolomics Technologies &  Data analysis [14 lectures]: Mass spectrometry for metabolite 
profiling, liquid & gas chromatography separation technologies; capillary electrophoresis 
based separation technology; nuclear magnetic resonance in profiling; single cell 
metabolomics, process ing of data for analysis, statistical analysis, lifestyle disease 
biomarker identification, lipidomics 
Applications: Clinical samples, extraction methods, sample preparation, metabolic markers of 
disease, comparative metabolomics, metabonomics 
Textbook 
1. Fan T.W.M., Lane A.N., Higashi R.M., [Eds], (2012), The Handbook of Metabolomics , 
Springer 
  
Reference Books 
2. Sussulini A., [Ed] (2017), Metabolomics: From Fundamentals to Clinical Applications , 
Springer 
  
Online Course Material 
None 
  
373 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Program Elective Set 3 
 
Biological Systems & Biosensors 
 
  
374 
 
Title Experimental design for biologists Number BBN7XX0 
Department Bioscience and BioEngineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Nil   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide an understanding of the philosophy of experimentation and the steps involved in 
experiment design and validation.  
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
2. Design experiments, validate and test models.    
Contents 
Philosophy of Experimentation:  The Philosophy of Science Governs the Practice of Science, 
Defining Scientific Research, Why Do Science? What Is Science For? The Need for Inductive 
Reasoning, The First Step: Establishing Your Framework, A Short History of Philosophy Relevant 
to Scientific Method, the Problem of Induction, Examining the Hypothesis -Falsification 
Framework, Hypothesis as a Framework for Scientific Projects, Scientific Settings in Which a 
Hypothesis-Falsification Framework Is Not Feasible, The Q uestion and the Model: Forming an 
Inductive Framework for Scientific Projects (9 Lectures) 
System Validation:  The System, System Validation, Choice of a Model Organism or 
Technique: 
Validation Experiments, System Validation Requirements for Distinct Experi mental 
Readouts, 
System Specificity: Specificity of Detection and Specificity of Perturbation, System 
Sensitivity: 
Minimizing Signal to Noise to Improve Sensitivity of Detection, System Stability, 
Determining 
Conditions to Measure Efficacy, System Validati on: Determining Conditions to Measure 
Safety 
(9 Lectures) 
The Experiment Definition of the Experiment: The Framework for an Individual Experiment, The 
Negative Control: Distinct Types, The Requirement for the Positive Control, Method and 
Reagent Controls, Subject Controls, Assumption Controls, Experimentalist Controls: 
Establishing a Claim to an Objective Perspective, Biological Replicates, Technical Replicates, 
Experimental Repeats, Time Courses, and Dose Responses, Summary of Components of 
Individual Experiment (9 Lectures) 
The Model Building: the Model: Representations of the Experimental Data, Data Filtration, 
Model induction: Asking Follow-Up Questions and Finishing the Project by Writing the 
Manuscript, A Short Synopsis. (5 Lectures) 
375 
 
 
Designing the Experimental Project: A Biological Example (10 Lectures) 
Textbook  
1.Glass D.J., Experimental Design for Biologists, 2ndEdition, Novartis Institutes for 
Biomedical Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts 
2.Barker K.,  At the Bench: A Laboratory Navigator, Updated Edition, The Institute for 
Systems Biology, Seattle    
Reference Books  
1. Adams D. S., Lab Math: A Handbook of Measurements, Calculations, and Other Quantitative 
Skills for Use at the Bench, 2nd edition, The Tufts Center for Regenerative and 
Developmental Biology and Department of Biology, Tufts University 
 
Online Course Material  
1. Biology course, https://courses.ibiology.org/courses/course-v1:iBiology 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
376 
 
Title Disease, Processes, Diagnostics & 
Therapeutics 
Number BBL7XX0 
Department Bioscience and BioEngineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Nil   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduction to fundamentals of immunology, clinical immunology, Diagnostics and 
therapeutics  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Ability to understand immunological processes and 376nalyse diagnostics  
 
Contents 
Immunology – Fundamental Concepts and Anatomy of Immune System:  
Components of innate and acquired immunity; Complement and Inflammatory 
responses; Organs and cells of the immune system - primary and secondary 
lymphoid organs; Lymphatic system; MHC,  Immune Responses Generated by B 
and T Lymphocytes, Immunoglobulins -basic structure, classes and subclasses, 
antigenic determinants; Organization of immunoglobulin genes; VDJ 
Recombination, Principles of cell 376nalyse376ry; Immunological basis of self –
non-self discrimination; Kinetics and memory; B and T cell maturation, activation 
and differentiation into Subsets, Antigen -Antibody Interactions, Precipitation, 
agglutination and complement mediated immune reactions; Advanced 
immunological techniques – RIA, ELI SA, Western blotting, ELISPOT assay, 
immunofluorescence, flow cytometry; Biosensor assay (13Lectures) 
Clinical Immunology:  Immunity to Infection : Bacteria, viral, fungal and parasitic 
infections (with examples from each group); Hypersensitivity – Type I -IV; 
Autoimmunity; Types of autoimmune diseases; Mechanism and role of CD4+ T 
cells; MHC and TCR in autoimmunity; Treatment of autoimmune diseases; 
Transplantation – Immunological basis of graft rejection; Clinical transplantation 
and immunosuppressive ther apy Tumor immunology : Tumor antigens; Immune 
response to tumors and tumor evasion of the immune system, Cancer 
Immunotherapy, Immunodeficiency -Primary immunodeficiencies, Acquired or 
secondary immunodeficiencies, case studies (16 Lectures) 
Vaccines and Dru g Therapy (13 Lectures) Active and passive immunization; Live, 
killed, attenuated, sub unit vaccines; Vaccine technology - Role and properties of 
adjuvants, recombinant DNA and protein based vaccines, plant -based vaccines, 
reverse vaccinology; Peptide vacci nes, conjugate vaccines; Antibody genes and 
antibody engineering - chimeric and hybrid monoclonal antibodies; Catalytic 
antibodies and generation of immunoglobulin gene libraries (13 Lectures) 
 
377 
 
Textbook  
1. Janeway,C (1996), Immunobiology, 4th Edition Garland Publishing 
 
Reference Books  
2. R,A, Goldsby., Thomas, J.K., and Barbara, A, Osborne. (2002), Kuby Immunology, 6th 
Edition Freeman  
 
Self-learning Material  
1. Manjunath R., Nandi D, Karande A, Essentials in Immunology, Indian Institute of Science 
Bangalore,  http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104108055/, NPTEL Course Material. 
2. Kumar S, Cellular and Molecular Immunology, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/102103038/,NPTEL Course Material. 
 
  
378 
 
Title Cardiovascular Physiology:  Signals, systems and 
controls  
Number BBLXX0 
Department Bioscience and BioEngineering L-T-P [C] 1–0–0  
Offered for M.Tech Type Elective 
Prerequisite Nil   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide an understanding of the hierarchical organization of Chemical and electrical signals 
and Control Mechanisms including Feed -back loops and switches for controlling Energy, 
Mechanics, Flow and Transport.  
2. Provide an understanding of the workings o f the human body in context of engineering 
principles so as to develop an interdisciplinary outlook to biological as well as engineering 
problem-solving. 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand basic human physiology 
2. Analyze physiological systems from an engineering perspective 
3. Imagine engineering solutions that can solve biological problems OR can get inspired by 
biology to solve engineering problems.  
Contents 
Cardiopulmonary Physiology ( 14lectures): Electricity in cardiac cells, Control of cardiac 
Automaticity, ECG, Cardiac and smooth muscle, Cardiovascular mechanics, and dynamics, 
Microcirculation control mechanisms, Cerebral and Pulmonary circulation: controls and 
switches, congestive heart failure, Shock, Breathing: forces, volume and flow, Resistance to 
Air flow, Alveolar gas exchange and transport, Acid -base balance, Neural control of 
Respiration.  
Textbook  
1. Joseph Feher., (2016), Quantitative Human Physiology, 2nd Edition, Academic Press  
2. E.N. Marieb (2006), Human Anatomy and Physiology, 6th Edition, Pearson Education 
Reference Books  
1. Boron W. F, Boulpaep E. L. Medical Physiology, 3rd Edition, Elsevier.  
 
Online Course Material  
1. Dennis Freeman, 6 -021j Quantitative Physiology: Cells and Tissues , Fall 2004, MIT 
OpenCourseWare Massachusetts Institute of Technology, https://ocw.mit.edu. License: 
Creative Commons BY-NC-SA 
2. Venegas, J, Mark, F.  Quantitative Physiology: Organ Transport Systems,  MIT 
OpenCourseWare Massachusetts Institute of Technology, https://ocw.mit.edu. License: 
Creative Commons BY-NC-SA  
 
379 
 
Title Human Physiology Laboratory Number BBXXX 
Department Bioscience and BioEngineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Nil     
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide an understanding of the hierarchical organization of Chemical and 
electrical signals and Control Mechanisms including Feed -back loops and 
switches for controlling Energy, Mechanics, Flow and Transport. 
2. Provide an understanding of the workings of the human body in context of 
engineering principles so as to develop an interdisciplinary outlook to biological 
as well as engineering problem-solving. 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.Understand basic human physiology 
2.Analyze physiological systems from an engineering perspective 
3.Imagine engineering solutions that can solve biological problems OR can get 
inspired by biology to solve engineering problems.  
Contents 
Physiology of excitable Cells:  Resting Membrane Potential, Modeling action 
potentials and 379nalyse379ry Conduction, Neuromuscular transmission, 
Introduction to Neurons in Action 
Cardiopulmonary Physiology: bike ergometer with heart rate interface, peak  flow 
meter and respiratory volumes, Muscle Function assessment 
(electromyography), health and fitness assessment using b alance and mobility 
parameters. 
Stress and Exercise Physiology 
eye tracking, electro electroencephalography (EEG), verbal response (TA)  and 
systematic observation using dedicated software (Morae) to measure cognitive load; 
use pupil dilation, galvanic skin response (GSR) 
Textbook 
1.  Joseph Feher., (2016), Quantitative Human Physiology, 2nd Edition, Academic 
Press 
2.  E.N. Marieb (2006), Human Anatomy and Physiology , 6 th Edition, Pearson 
Education 
Reference Books 
1. Boron W. F, Boulpaep E. L. Medical Physiology, 3rd Edition, Elsevier. 
380 
 
 
Online Course Material 
1.  Moore JW, Stuart A.E, Neurons in Action 2: Tutorials and Simulations in 
NEURON, Yale J Biol Med. 2008 Mar; 81(1): 50–51. 
  
381 
 
Title Cellular and Molecular Neuroscience Number BBXXX 
Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–2 [4] 
Offered for B.Tech Type Elective  
Prerequisite Nil   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide introduction to the basic principles to understand how the brain works  
2. Provide an understanding of the structure and function of the Human brain in health and 
disease 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Integrate their understanding of structural and functional units of the human brain for 
design of health technologies  
 
Contents  
Introduction of Neuroscience [10 lectures]:  Nervous systems, basic structure, development 
and complexity; senses and responses as esse ntial components of life, Cellular units of the 
brain Neurons; types, structure and function, Glia, Maintenance of cellular homeostasis in 
the brain, the blood-brain barrier. 
Inter and Intracellular 381nalyse381ry[10 lectures] : Resting membrane potential, action 
potential and impulse propagation, importance of ion channels, microtubules organization, 
myelin sheath; secondary messengers, Neurotransmitters, classes, criteria for 
classification, the synapse, synaptic transmission, electrical and chemical synap ses, 
synaptic integration of information, Neuromuscular junction, primary and secondary motor 
cortex, integration of sensory signals to motor actions, motor neuron diseases  
Sensory perception in health and disease  [10 lectures] : sensory receptors; propert ies, 
sensitization and desensitization, sensory coding, Somatosensory System; organization, 
receptors (mechanoreceptors, proprioceptors, nociceptors, thermal receptors and Visceral 
sensations), Auditory sensory perception; structure of the internal ear, mo dulation of sound 
waves into nerve signal, integration within the auditory cortex, Visual pathways; 
organization, visual perception and processing, photoreceptors, processing and integ ration 
of visual information.   
Laboratory Experiments [12 laboratory sessions] 
Immunohistochemistry of the human brain, understanding distinct cellular populations and  
morphologies, Neuronal cell culture; neurons, microglia, astrocytes and endothelial cells, 
assessment of morphological changes with stress and disease, visual ization of inter and 
intracellular cell 381nalyse381ry; cell migration, proliferation, secreted cytokines and 
chemokines.    
 
382 
 
Textbook  
1. Kandel,E., (2012), Principles of Neural Science, 5th Edition, Elsevier  
2. Zigmond M (2012), Fundamental Neuroscience, 4th Edition Elsevier 
Reference Books  
1. Lodish B, Kaiser K (2016), Molecular Cell Biology, 8th Edition, WH Freeman 
 
Online Course Material  
1. Constantine-Paton M, 9.013J / 7.68J Cell and Molecular Neurobiology , Spring 2008, MIT 
OpenCourseWare Massachusetts Institute of Technology, https://ocw.mit.edu. License: 
Creative Commons BY-NC-SA 
 
 
  
383 
 
Title Sensory Neural Systems Number BBXXX 
Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech Type Elective 
Prerequisite Nil     
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide introduction to the basic principles to understand how the sensory neural 
pathways work 
2. Provide an understanding of the structure and function of the sensory neural 
pathways in health and disease 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Integrate their understanding of structural and functional units of the human brain for 
design of health technologies 
  
Contents 
BL6XX1 Synaptic communication: function and dysfunction [1-0-0]  [14 
  lectures]: sensory receptors; properties, sensitization and 
  desensitization, sensory coding, Somatosensory System; organization, 
  receptors (mechanoreceptors, proprioceptors, nociceptors, thermal receptors 
  and Visceral sensations),  Disorders of sensory perception. (1 fractal) 
 
BBL6XX2  Auditory perception: from cell to signal [1-0-0] [14lectures]: Auditory 
  sensory perception; structure of the internal ear, modulation of sound waves 
  into nerve signal, integration within the auditory cortex, (1fractal) 
 
BBL6XX1  Visual perception [1-0-0] [14lectures] Visual pathways; organization, visual 
  perception and processing, photoreceptors, processing and integration of 
  visual information. Disorders of visual perception (1fractal) 
Textbook 
1.  Kandel,E., (2012), Principles of Neural Science, 5th Edition, Elsevier 
2. Zigmond M (2012), Fundamental Neuroscience, 4th Edition Elsevier 
Reference Boo 
384 
 
1. Lodish B, Kaiser K (2016), Molecular Cell Biology, 8th Edition, WH Freeman 
 
Online Course Material 
1. Constantine-Paton M, 9.013J / 7.68J Cell and Molecular Neurobiology, Spring 2008, MIT 
OpenCourseWare Massachusetts Institute of Technology, https://ocw.mit.edu. License: 
Creative Commons BY-NC-SA 
  
 
385 
 
Title Human Physiology Laboratory Number BBXXX 
Department Bioscience and BioEngineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Nil   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide an understanding of the hierarchical organization of Chemical and electrical 
signals and Control Mechanisms including Feed -back loops and switches for controlling 
Energy, Mechanics, Flow and Transport.  
2. Provide an understanding of the workings o f the human body in context of engineering 
principles so as to develop an interdisciplinary outlook to biological as well as engineering 
problem-solving. 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand basic human physiology 
2. Analyze physiological systems from an engineering perspective 
3. Imagine engineering solutions that can solve biological problems OR can get inspired by 
biology to solve engineering problems.  
Contents 
Physiology of excitable Cells:  Resting Membrane  Potential, Modeling action potentials and 
385nalyse385ry Conduction, Neuromuscular transmission, In troduction to Neurons in 
Action 
Cardiopulmonary Physiology: bike ergometer with heart rate interface, peak flow meter and 
respiratory volumes, Muscle Function a ssessment (electromyography), health and fitness 
assessment using balance and mobility parameters. 
Stress and Exercise Physiology 
eye tracking, electro electroencephalography (EEG), verbal response (TA) and systematic 
observation using dedicated software (Morae) to measure cognitive load; use pupil dilatio n, 
galvanic skin response (GSR) 
Textbook  
1. Joseph Feher., (2016), Quantitative Human Physiology, 2nd Edition, Academic Press  
2. E.N. Marieb (2006), Human Anatomy and Physiology, 6th Edition, Pearson Education 
Reference Books  
1. Boron W. F, Boulpaep E. L. Medical Physiology, 3rd Edition, Elsevier.  
Online Course Material  
1. Moore JW, Stuart A.E, Neurons in Action 2: Tutorials and Simulations in NEURON, Yale J 
Biol Med. 2008 Mar; 81(1): 50–51. 
 
386 
 
Title Quantitative Physiology: systems and controls of 
the human machine  
Number BBXXX 
Department Bioscience and BioEngineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Nil   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide an understanding of the hierarchical organization of Chemical and electrical signals 
and Control Mechanisms including Feed -back loops and switches for controlling Energy, 
Mechanics, Flow and Transport.  
2. Provide an understanding of the workings o f the human body in context of engineering 
principles so as to develop an interdisciplinary outlook to biological as well as engineering 
problem-solving. 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand basic human physiology 
2. Analyze physiological systems from an engineering perspective 
3. Imagine engineering solutions that can solve biological problems OR can get inspired by 
biology to solve engineering problems.  
Contents 
Physical and Chemical Foundations of Physiology : Homeostasis, energy balance, feedback 
control systems, pressure driven flow, Electrical Force, Potential, Capacitance, and Current, 
Electrochemical Potential and Free Energy, Membrane transport across a biological 
membrane. 
Physiology of excitable Cells:  The Origin of the Resting Membrane Potential, GHK equation, 
action potentials, Membrane excitability, Modeling action potentials, 386nalyse386ry 
Conduction, Skeletal Muscle Mechanics, Neuromuscular transmission, Excitation –
Contraction Coupling Motor units, Size Principle, Concentric, Isometric, and Eccentric 
Contractions, Fatigue and Tetanus.  
Cardiopulmonary Physiology: Electricity in cardiac c ells, Control of cardiac Automaticity, ECG, 
Cardiac and smooth muscle, Cardiovascular mechanics, and dynamics, Microcirculation 
control mechanisms, Cerebral and Pulmonary circulation: controls and switches, congestive 
heart failure, Shock, Breathing: force s, volume and flow, Resistance to Air flow, Alveolar 
gas exchange and transport, Acid-base balance, Neural control of Respiration.  
Renal Physiology: Body fluid compartments and overview of renal function, Measurements of 
function and clearance, Glomerular  filtration/Renal Hemodynamics, Tubular transport of 
electrolytes and water, Concentration and dilution of urine, Regulation of sodium balance, 
extracellular volume and Blood pressure, Renal mechanisms of hypertension.  
387 
 
Textbook  
1. Joseph Feher., (2016), Quantitative Human Physiology, 2nd Edition, Academic Press  
2. E.N. Marieb (2006), Human Anatomy and Physiology, 6th Edition, Pearson Education 
Reference Books  
1. Boron W. F, Boulpaep E. L. Medical Physiology, 3rd Edition, Elsevier.  
 
Online Course Material  
1. Dennis Freeman, 6 -021j Quantitative Physiology: Cells and Tissues , Fall 2004, MIT 
OpenCourseWare Massachusetts Institute of Technology, https://ocw.mit.edu. License: 
Creative Commons BY-NC-SA 
2. Venegas, J, Mark, F.  Quantitative Physiology: Organ Trans port Systems,  MIT 
OpenCourseWare Massachusetts Institute of Technology, https://ocw.mit.edu. License: 
Creative Commons BY-NC-SA  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
388 
 
Title Immunodiagnostics and therapeutics Number  
Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–2 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. (MT) Program Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide an introduction to fundamentals techniques of clinical immunology and Immune 
based Diagnostics  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Immunology based diagnostics techniques for to create and 388nalyse diagnostics  
 
Contents  
Immunodiagnostics [14 lectures]: Selection of animals for immunological assays, Preparation 
of antigens, Immunization and methods of bleeding,  Serum separation, Storage. Antibody 
titre by ELISA method. Double diffusion, Immuno -electrophoresis and Radial Immuno 
diffusion. Complement fixation test. Hybridoma technology and monoclonal antibody 
production. Lymphoproliferation by mitogen / antigen.  
Immunotherapeutics [14 lectures]: Active and passive immunization; Live, killed, attenuated, 
sub unit vaccines; Vaccine technology - Role and properties of adjuvants, recombinant DNA 
and protein based vaccines, plant -based vaccines, reverse vaccinology; Pep tide vaccines, 
conjugate vaccines; Antibody genes and antibody engineering - chimeric and hybrid 
monoclonal antibodies; Catalytic antibodies and generation of immunoglobulin gene 
libraries 
Laboratory Experiments [12 experiments]: 
Immunoblotting for specific antigens, Dot blot assay, Blood smear identification of leucocytes 
by Giemsa stain. Quantification of Phagocytic activity, Separation of mononuclear cells by 
Ficoll-Hypaque. Immunohistochemistry (direct and indirect peroxidase assay), detection of 
Salmonella genus which causes enteric or Typhoid Fever by using qualitative slide agglutination 
test (Widal test), Detection of Treponemes responsible for veneral diseases such as  syphilis 
(VDRL) test, IgG Purification technique (Protein A Based, Spin Column)  
Textbook  
1. R.A. Goldsby., Thomas,J.K., and Barbara,A, Osborne., Kuby Immunology, Freeman,2002, 
6th Edition 
2. Stanier, R. Y., General Microbiology, W.H. Freeman and Co., 2009. 
3. Pelczar, M.J., Chan, E. C. S., Krieg, N.R., Microbiology, Tata McGraw – Hill Education, 2001 
 
389 
 
Reference Books  
1. Murphy, K., Travers, P., Walport, M., & Janeway, C. (2012). Janeway’s Immunobiology. New 
York: Garland Science. 
3. Madigan, M.T.,  Martinko, J.M.,  Brock, Biology of Microorganisms, Prentice-Hall, Inc., 2006, 
11th  Edition. 
Online Course Material  
1 NPTEL Video Lectures on  Essentials in Immunology by Prof. R. Manjunath, Prof. Dipankar 
Nandi , Prof. Anjali Karande, Indian Institute of Science Bangalore  
(http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104108055/)  
2. NPTEL Video Lectures on Cellular and Molecular Immunology by Prof. Sachin Kumar, Indian 
Institute of Technology Guwahati  (http://nptel.ac.in/courses/102103038/)     
 
 
  
390 
 
Title Sensory Neural Systems Number BBL7XX
0 
Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech Type Elective  
Prerequisite Nil   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide introduction to the basic principles to understand how the sensory neural pathways 
work 
2. Provide an understanding of the structure and function of the sensory neural pathways in 
health and disease 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Integrate their understanding of structural and functional units of the human brain for 
design of health technologies  
 
Contents  
BBL7XX1 Syn aptic communication: function and dysfunction [1 -0-0]  [14 lectures] : sensory 
receptors; properties, sensitization and desensitization, sensory coding, Somatosensory 
System; organization, receptors (mechanoreceptors, proprioceptors, nociceptors, thermal 
receptors and Visceral sensations),  Disorders of sensory perception.  (1 fractal) 
BBL7XX2 Auditory perception: from cell to signal [1 -0-0] [14lectures]: Auditory sensory 
perception; structure of the internal ear, modulation of sound waves into nerve signa l, 
integration within the auditory cortex, (1fractal) 
BBL7XX1 Visual perception [1 -0-0] [14lectures] Visual pathways; organization, visual 
perception and processing, photoreceptors, processing and integration of visual 
information. Disorders of visual perception (1fractal) 
Textbook  
1. Kandel,E., (2012), Principles of Neural Science, 5th Edition, Elsevier  
2. Zigmond M (2012), Fundamental Neuroscience, 4th Edition Elsevier 
Reference Books  
1. Lodish B, Kaiser K (2016), Molecular Cell Biology, 8th Edition, WH Freeman 
 
Online Course Material  
1. Constantine-Paton M, 9.013J / 7.68J Cell and Molecular Neurobiology , Spring 2008, MIT 
OpenCourseWare Massachusetts Institute of Technology, https://ocw.mit.edu. License: 
Creative Commons BY-NC-SA 
 
 
  
391 
 
Title Synaptic communication: function and 
dysfunction  
Number BBL6XX3 
Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 
Offered for B.Tech Type Elective  
Prerequisite Nil   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide introduction to the basic principles to understand how synaptic communication 
works  
2. Provide an understanding of Synaptic function in health and disease 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Integrate their underst anding of structural and functional units of the human brain for 
design of health technologies  
 
Contents  
     Synpatic structure: function and dysfunction (1 fractal) Resting membrane potential, action 
potential and impulse propagation, importance of ion  channels, secondary messengers, 
Neurotransmitters, classes, criteria for classification,  the synapse, synaptic transmission, 
electrical and chemical synapses, synaptic integration of information, Neuromuscular 
junction, primary and secondary motor cortex,  integration of sensory signals to motor 
actions, motor neuron diseases [14lectures].   
Textbook  
1. Kandel,E., (2012), Principles of Neural Science, 5th Edition, Elsevier  
2. Zigmond M (2012), Fundamental Neuroscience, 4th Edition Elsevier 
 
Reference Books  
1. Lodish B, Kaiser K (2016), Molecular Cell Biology, 8th Edition, WH Freeman 
 
Online Course Material  
1. Constantine-Paton M, 9.013J / 7.68J Cell and Molecular Neurobiology , Spring 2008, MIT 
OpenCourseWare Massachusetts Institute of Technology,  https://ocw.mit.edu. License: 
Creative Commons BY-NC-SA 
 
 
  
392 
 
 
Title Cell and Molecular Biology  Number BBL7XX0 
Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [D] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. 1st Year Type Elective   
Prerequisite Nil   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. offer both basic as well as advanced knowledge of cell biology and molecular biology, 
mechanisms and progress fundamental conceptual base for scientific research understanding  
     
Learning Outcomes  
The students will have an ability to 
1. Fundamental comprehensive knowledge of cellular and molecular biology mechanisms and their 
regulation to understand advances and implications in health associated biotechnology  
Contents  
Introduction to Cell and Molecular Biology:  Structure and function s of cell -organelles; Cell 
membrane physiochemical properties; Molecular Organization, biogenesis and functions of cell 
membrane; Eukaryotic chromosomes (Lectures-10) 
Cell Reproduction:  Introduction to cell division; Biological principles of Mitosis and Me iosis; 
Difference and comparison of cell division among prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms; 
Cytokines; Regulation of cell division; Cancer and cell cycle deregulation (Lectures-12) 
Cell Death and Diseases:   Apoptosis: Phases and significance, Morphologic al and Biochemical 
changes associated With apoptotic cells, Apoptotic Pathways and regulators; Molecular 
genetics and diseases associated with cell death (Lectures-10) 
Mechanisms of Molecular Biology:  Prokaryotic & Eukaryotic Transcription; Transcription u nit; 
Transcript processing; Processing of RNA Eukaryotic transcription; RNA polymerase; Eukaryotic 
promoters and enhancers (Lectures-10) 
Textbook  
1. Bruce Alberts, (2014), Molecular Biology of the cell, 6th Edition, Garland Science  
2. Lodish., and W.H Freeman, (2016), Molecular Cell Biology, 8th Edition,  Macmillan learning  
3. Gerald Karp and Nancy L Pruitt, (2016), Cell and Molecular Biology, John 8th Edition Wiley and 
Sons 
Self-Learning Material 
1. D. Karunagaran, Molecular Cell Biology, Department of Biotechnology Indian Institute of 
Technology Madras, https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/102106025/ 
Preparatory Course Material  
1. NPTEL Lectures:  on Molecular Cell Biology, Indian Institute of Technology Madras,  
http://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/102106025/ 
 
 
393 
 
Title Immunodiagnostics and therapeutics Number  BBL7XX0 
Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–2 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. (MT) Program Type Elective 
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide an introduction to fundamentals techniques of clinical immunology and Immune 
based Diagnostics 
  
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Immunology based diagnostics techniques for to create and 393nalyse diagnostics 
 Contents 
Immunodiagnostics [14 lectures]: Selection of animals for immunological assays, 
Preparation of antigens, Immunization and methods of bleeding, Serum separation, 
Storage. Antibody titre by ELISA method. Double diffusion, Immuno -electrophoresis 
and Radial Immuno diffusion. Complement fixation test. Hybridoma technology and 
monoclonal antibody production. Lymphoproliferation by mitogen / antigen. 
Immunotherapeutics [14 lect ures]: Active and passive immunization; Live, killed, 
attenuated, sub unit vaccines; Vaccine technology - Role and properties of adjuvants, 
recombinant DNA and protein based vaccines, plant -based vaccines, reverse 
vaccinology; Peptide vaccines, conjugate va ccines; Antibody genes and antibody 
engineering- chimeric and hybrid monoclonal antibodies; Catalytic antibodies and 
generation of immunoglobulin gene libraries 
 Laboratory Experiments [12 experiments]: 
Immunoblotting for specific antigens, Dot blot assay, Blood smear identification of leucocytes 
by Giemsa stain. Quantification of Phagocytic activity, Separation of mononuclear cells by 
Ficoll-Hypaque. Immunohistochemistry (direct and indirect peroxidase assay), detection of 
Salmonella genus which causes enteric or Typhoid Fever by using qualitative slide 
agglutination test (Widal test), Detection of Treponemes responsible for veneral diseases such 
as  syphilis (VDRL) test, IgG Purification technique (Protein A Based, Spin Column) 
 Textbook 
1.  R.A. Goldsby., Thomas,J.K., and Barbara,A, Osborne., Kuby Immunology, 
Freeman,2002, 6th Edition 
2. Stanier, R. Y., General Microbiology, W.H. Freeman and Co., 2009. 
     3. Pelczar, M.J., Chan, E. C. S., Krieg, N.R., Microbiology, Tata McGraw – Hill Education,  
        2001 
394 
 
  
Reference Books 
1. Murphy, K., Travers, P., Walport, M., & Janeway, C. (2012). Janeway’s Immunobiology. 
New York: Garland Science. 
2. Madigan, M.T.,  Martinko, J.M.,  Brock, Biology of Microorganisms, Prentice-Hall, Inc., 
2006, 11th  Edition. 
Online Course Material 
1. NPTEL Video Lectures on  Essentials in Immunology by Prof. R. Manjunath, Prof. 
Dipankar Nandi , Prof. Anjali Karande, Indian Institute of Science Bangalore  
(http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104108055/) 
2. NPTEL Video Lectures on Cellular and Molecular Immunology by Prof. Sachin Kumar, 
Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati  (http://nptel.ac.in/courses/102103038/)    
 
 
 
 
395 
 
Title Synaptic communication: function 
and dysfunction 
Number BBL6XX3 
Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 
Offered for B.Tech Type Elective 
Prerequisite Nil     
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide introduction to the basic principles to understand how synaptic communication 
works 
2. Provide an understanding of Synaptic function in health and disease 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Integrate their understanding of structural and functional units of the human brain for design 
of health technologies 
  
Contents 
  Synpatic structure: function and dysfunction (1 fractal) Resting membrane potential, 
action potential and impulse propagation, importance of ion channels, secondary 
messengers, Neurotransmitters, classes, criteria for classification, the synaps e, synaptic 
transmission, electrical and chemical synapses, synaptic integration of information, 
Neuromuscular junction, primary and secondary motor cortex, integration of sensory 
signals to motor actions, motor neuron diseases [14lectures].   
Textbook 
1.  Kandel,E., (2012), Principles of Neural Science, 5th Edition, Elsevier 
2. Zigmond M (2012), Fundamental Neuroscience, 4th Edition Elsevier 
Reference Books 
1. Lodish B, Kaiser K (2016), Molecular Cell Biology, 8th Edition, WH Freeman 
  
Online Course Material 
1. Constantine-Paton M, 9.013J / 7.68J Cell and Molecular Neurobiology , Spring 2008, MIT 
OpenCourseWare Massachusetts Institute of Technology, https://ocw.mit.edu. License: 
Creative Commons BY-NC-SA 
  
 
 
396 
 
Title Microbes as sensors Number BBL7XX0 
Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 1-0-0 [1] 
Offered for   Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite       
  
Objectives 
1. The instructor will discuss the methods by which living microbes can be used as 
sensors. 
  
Learning Outcomes 
1. Students will have an ability to  design live microbial based biosensors for 
sensing specific pollutants, marker for environment and/or health monitoring 
Contents 
Introduction: Advantages of using microbes as sensors, physical and chemical 
methods of microbial, immobilization. (4 lectures) 
Electrochemical microbial biosensor: Amperometric, potentiometric and 
conductimetric (5 lectures) 
Optical biosensors; bioluminescence, fluorescence, and calorimet ric based sensors 
(2 lectures). 
Metabolism based: Microbial sensors based on analysi s of oxygen reduction rate or 
carbon di oxide production rate. (3 lectures) 
Textbook 
No textbook. The research papers will serve as the reading material and reference 
material 
Reference Books 
1. Brock, et al., (2012), Biology of Microorganisms, 13 th edition Ben,jamin 
Cummings, Boston, MA. 
  
Online course material 
None 
 
 
 
397 
 
Title Measurements in Remote Healthcare  Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science & Enginering  L-T-P [C] 1-0-0 [1] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. Discuss techniques to design the sensor-based system for remote healthcare 
2.  Provide mechanisms to design and develop mobile platforms for healthcare sensors 
& data 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have an ability to: 
1. design end-to-end wireless sensors based system in remote areas 
2. critically identify and use the tools for sensor placement, and data processing 
 
Contents 
Contents 
Sensor, Networks & Data for Healthcare:  Overview of wireless sensor networks, 
Network characteristics, Network Design and Challenges, Wireless Sensor Network 
Protocol Stack, Sensor Data aggregation techniques, Sensor Data storage, Data 
Management and Processing; Time Synchronisation in WSN: Nee d and Techniques; 
Sensor Node localisation: Need and Techniques; Security and Privacy - Authentication 
and Cryptography; Wireless Sensor and Actuator Networks - Bidirectional Network 
design (10 lectures) 
Healthcare on Mobile Platforms: Need for mobile platforms for healthcare applications, 
Mobile application development for Healthcare: Wireless Sensor Data collection 
(Bluetooth, WiFi, 3G, 4G), Data Processing and Alert generation; (4 lectures) 
Textbook 
1.  Jun Zheng, Abbas Jamalipour , (2009), Wireless Senso r Networks: A Networking 
Perspective, A John Wiley & Sons, IEEE Publication 
2. Nawaz Mohamudally , (2017), Smartphones from an Applied Research Perspective , 
InTech 
Reference Books 
1. Koushik Maharatna, Silvio Bonfiglio, (2014), Systems Design for Remote Healthcare, 
Springer 
Online course material 
  
 
 
398 
 
Course Title  Analog and Interfacing 
Circuits 
Number EEL7XX0 
 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M. Tech. 1st year Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite Digital and Analog Electronics    
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Familiarize students with the concepts of Analog IC Design and give them a 
comprehensive overview of various amplifiers. 
2. Familiarize the students with different building blocks of a mixed signal interface circuit 
design essential for sensors and IoT. 
Learning Outcomes 
Students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand fundamental principles of CMOS Analog IC Design and interfacing of analog 
signals with the digital signal processing circuits. 
2. Apply the circuit design fundamentals for IoT applications. 
3. Work on design tools like Cadence/Mentor Graphics 
Contents 
EEL7XX1: Fundamentals of Analog Circuits and Design [1-0-0] 
(Fractal 1)  Introduction to  Analog VLSI and design issues in CMOS t echnologies, MOS 
models, SPICE Models, Single stage amplifiers, Biasing circuits, Voltage and Current 
reference circuits, Feedback analysis, Multistage amplifiers, Mismatch and noise analysis, 
Differential amplifiers, Oscillators (14 Lectures) 
 
EEL7XX2: Readout Electronics [1-0-0] 
(Fractal 2) Switch capacitor circuits: Principles and applications in filter design; switches and 
related design issues, variable gain amplifier, low noise and high speed amplifier topologies. 
Analog to digital converters:  Types of ADCs, static and dynamic characteristics; track and 
hold, and sample and hold circuits; comparators; detail design analysis for successive 
approximation register (SAR) ADCs, discrete -time and continuous time sigma -delta ADCs  
(14 Lectures) 
 
EEL7XX3: Digital to Analog Converters Design [1-0-0] 
(Fractal 3) Digital to Analog Converters:  Voltage-based DACs; charge -based DACs; current-
based DACs – binary and thermometer currents. Phase-locked loop: Basics; PLL dynamics; 
voltage controlled oscillator, frequency synthesis. Applications: Wearable Biomedical IoT 
nodes (14 Lectures) 
Text Books 
1. Razavi, B., (2016), Design of Analog CMOS Integrated Circuits , 2nd Edition, McGraw-Hill 
Education. 
2. R. Jacob Bak er, H.W.Li, and D.E. Boyce, (2009), – CMOS Circuit Design ,Layout and 
399 
 
Simulation, 2nd Edition, Prentice-Hall of India 
3. David A. Johns, Ken Martin, (2013), “Analog Integrated Circuit Design”, 2 nd Edition, John 
Wiley and Sons. 
Self Learning material 
1. Shanthi Pavan, VLSI Data Conversion Circuits, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117106034/ 
2. Nagendra Krishna pura, Analog Integrated Circuit Design, Department of Electrical 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117106030/ 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. P. E. Allen, D. R. Holberg (2013), CMOS Analog Circuit Design , 3rd Edition, Oxford 
University Press. 
2. R. Gregorian, G. C. Temes, (2008), “ Analog MOS Integrated Circuits for Signal 
Processing”, John Wiley and Sons. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
400 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Program Elective Set 4 
 
Systems Biology 
  
401 
 
 
Title Immunotechnology Number BBL7XX0 
Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech Type Elective  
Prerequisite Nil   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will:  Introduction to fundamentals of immunology, clinical immunology, 
Diagnostics and therapeutics  
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to:  understand immunological processes and 
analyze diagnostics  
Contents 
BBL7XX1: Fundamental Concepts: Antigen-Antibody Interactions [1-0-0] 
(Fractal 1) Precipitation, agglutination and complement mediated immune reactions; 
Advanced immunological techniques - RIA, ELISA, Western blotting, ELISPOT assay, 
immunofluorescence, flow cytometry; Biosensor assay (14 Lectures) 
BBL7XX2: Clinical Immunology [1-0-0] 
(Fractal 1) Clinical transplantation and immunosuppressive therapy; Tumor antigens; 
Immune response to tumors and tumor evasion of the immune system, Cancer 
Immunotherapy, Immun odeficiency-Primary immunodeficiencies, Acquired or secondary 
immunodeficiencies, case studies (14 Lectures) 
BBL7XX3: Vaccines and Drug Therapy [1-0-0] 
(Fractal 3) Active and passive immunization; Live, killed, attenuated, sub unit vaccines; 
Vaccine techno logy- Role and properties of adjuvants, recombinant DNA and protein 
based vaccines, plant -based vaccines, reverse vaccinology; Peptide vaccines, conjugate 
vaccines; Antibody genes and antibody engineering - chimeric and hybrid monoclonal 
antibodies; Catalyt ic antibodies and generation of immunoglobulin gene libraries (14 
Lectures) 
Textbook  
1. Janeway,C (1996), Immunobiology, 4th Edition Garland Publishing  
Reference Books  
1. R,A, Goldsby., Thomas,J.K., and Barbara,A, Osborne. (2002), Kuby Immunology, 6th 
Edition Freeman  
Online Course Material  
1. Manjunath R., Nandi D, Karande A, Essentials in Immunology, Indian Institute of Science 
Bangalore, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104108055/, NPTEL Course Material. 
2. Kumar S, Cellular and Molecular Immunology, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/102103038/, NPTEL Course Material. 
  
402 
 
 
Title Thermodynamics and Chemical Kinetics Number CYL6XX1 
CYL6XX3 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
 The Instructor will: 
1. Provide the connection between microscopic theory and thermodynamics.  
2. Describe how complex phenomena can be transferred into simple models.  
Learning Outcomes  
The students will have an ability to: 
1. Predict properties of many-body systems starting from its microscopic  
constituents and their interactions 
2. Connect microscopic theory to chemical reaction 
Contents  
CYL6XX1: Thermodynamics [1-0-0] 
thermodynamics laws, state and path functions and their applications; thermodynamic 
description of various types of processes; Maxwell‟s relations; spontaneity and equilibria  
Temperature and pressure dependence of thermodynamic quantities; Le Chatelier‟s principle 
(14 lectures) 
CYL6XX3: Chemical Kinetics [1-0-0] 
Empirical rate laws and temperature dependence; complex reactions; steady state 
approximation, determination of reaction mechanisms 
Mechanism: Theory of reaction rates, activation energy, transition state theory, potential 
energy surface, uni-molecular reaction rate, enzyme kinetics, salt effects (14 lectures). 
Text Books 
1. D. McQuarrie and J. D. Simon, (2014) Molecular Thermodynamics, Viva Books. 
2. D. McQuarrie, (2011) Physical Chemistry, A Molecular Approach, Viva Books. 
Self Learning Material 
K. J. Laidler, (2013) Chemical Kinetics, Pearson. 
Self Learning Material 
1. V.Balakrishnan, Department of Physics, IIT Madras. http://nptel.iitm.ac.in 
2. De, A. K. Advanced Chemical Thermodynamics and Kinetics, NPTEL Course Material, 
Chemical Sciences, IISER Mohali, https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc18_cy20/ 
 
 
403 
 
Title Synthetic Biology  Number BB7XX0 
Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P 
[C] 
3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech Type Elective  
Prerequisite Nil   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Teach the workings of DNA, RNA and proteins at their level of structure, regulatory 
elements and networks as building blocks or “biobricks” that can then be assembled into novel 
“devices” and “systems”.  
2. enable students to create simple circuits from biological components.  
3. Enable hands-on design and understanding of modularity and construction via Laboratory 
exercises using computer software enabling coding DNA sequences and simulating g enetic 
engineering experiments  
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Analyze biological systems from an engineering perspective 
2. Imagine engineering solutions that can solve biological problems OR get inspired by biology  
to solve engineering problems. 
Contents 
Introduction to Synthe tic Biology: Introduction to DNA, RNA, proteins and standard functional 
components of a cell, Basics of coding with DNA: Registry of standard biological parts, Analytical 
Tools: Genomics, Proteomics, Metabolomics (7 lectures) 
Simulation Tools:Gene designer, Serial Cloner, Vector NTI, Lab sessions in computer center (7 
lectures) 
Experimental Tools: P CR: Basics of PCR, Primer design, Error detection and correction. Gel 
electrophoresis: gel extraction ligation and transformation, Biobrick discovery and creatio n 
technique: mining nature for parts, Creating new parts with PCR, Cloning: basics, Cloning a 
new part into a “BioBrick” vector, Sequencing. (14 lectures) 
Quality control: Quality control Screens, Standardized Measurements for BioBricks, Assembly 
and measurement of a BioBrick system (7 lectures) 
Designing with Synthetic Biology: iGEM questions: What do you want Biology to do for you? 
Student presentations (7 lectures) 
Textbook  
1.Freemont, S. P , Kitney, R.I, Synthetic Biology-a primer, 1st Edition  
Reference Books  
1. Church GM, Regis E, Regenesis: How Synthetic Biology Will Reinvent Nature and Ourselves. 
 
 
 
404 
 
Self-learning Material  
http://synbio.mit.edu/education.html 
http://www.synberc.org/content/articles/what-synthetic-biology 
  
405 
 
 
Title Ordinary Differential Equations Number MAL6XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P 
[C] 
3–0–0-1[4] 
Offered for M.Tech Type Elective  
Prerequisite Nil   
Objectives 
1. Introduce the concepts of existence and uniqueness of solution of ordinary differential 
equations 
2. Develop analytical techniques to solve ordinary differential equations 
3. Understand the properties of solution of ordinary differential equations 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Understanding existence, uniqueness, and other properties of a solution of ordinary differential 
equations 
2. Solving ordinary differential equations with series method, Green's function method 
3. Solving systems of ODEs, and characterization of their solutions 
Contents 
Motivations and origins, Existence -Uniqueness [7 Lectures]:  Existence of solutions by Picard‟s 
method, uniqueness and continuous dependence w.r.t. initial conditions and parameters, 
continuation of solutions, existence  and uniqueness of solutions to system o f differential 
equations. 
Second Order Linear Equations [23 Lectur es]: General solution of differential equations using 
method of undetermined coefficients, method of variation of parameters, variable coefficients 
equations, Power series solution method, Legendre‟s equation, Frobenius method, Bessel‟s 
equation, Green's f unction method, Sturm -Liouville problems, orthogonal eigen -function 
expansions, Sturm comparison theorem, Sturm separation theorem, 
Systems of Differential Equations [10 Lectures]:  Phase plane method, critical points of the system 
and their stability analy sis, algebraic properties of solutions, the eigenvalue -eigenvector method 
of finding solutions, fundamental matrix solutions, matrix exponen tial, nonhomogeneous 
equations. 
Text Books 
1. Ross, S. L., Introduction to ordinary differential equations, 4th Ed.,  John Wiley Publications, 
1989 
2. Braun. M., Differential Equations and Their Applications, 3rd  Ed., Springer-Verlag, 1983 
3. Chicone, C., Ordinary Differential Equations with Applications, 2nd  Ed., Springer, 2006 
Reference Books 
1. Coddington, E. A., An Introduction to Ordinary Differential Equations, PHI Learning 1999 
406 
 
2. Birkhoff, G. and Rota G., Ordinary Differential Equations, 4th Ed., Wiley Publications, 1989  
3. Simmons, G., Differential Equations with Applications and Historical Notes, 2nd E d., McGraw 
Hill Education, 2017 
Online Course Material 
1. Agrawal, P. N. and Pandey, D. N. (IIT Roorkee), Ordinary and partial differential equations and 
applications, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107111/ 
2. Raghavendra V. (IIT Kanpur), Ordinary differential equ ations , 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111104031/ 
  
407 
 
Title Numerical Methods for PDE Number MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P 
[C] 
1–0–0-0 [1] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
The Instructor will 
1. Introduce finite difference schemes for numerical solutions of partial differential equations. 
2. Carry out numerical analysis of various finite difference schemes. 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply finite difference schemes for numerical solution of partial differential equations. 
2. Undertake out error analysis and stability analysis of finite difference schemes 
Contents 
[8 Lectures] Characterization of PDEs, Finite difference methods for elliptic, parabolic and 
hyperbolic problems. 
[6 Lect ures] Stability, consistency and convergence theory, dissipation a nd dispersion, error 
estimates. 
Text books 
1. Quarteroni, A. and Valli, A. , Numerical Approximation of Partial Differential Equations, 
Springer, 1997 
2. Morton, K. W. and Mayers, D. F. , Nu merical solution of partial di fferential equations, CUP, 
2005 
Reference Books 
1. Thomas, J. W. , Numerical partial differential equations: Finite difference methods, Springer, 
1995 
2. Trefethen, L. N. and David Bau III, Numerical Linear Algebra, SIAM, 1997 
Online Course Material 
1. Nayak, A. K. , Numerical methods: Finite Difference Approach, NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Mathematics, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107107/ 
 
 
 
408 
 
Title Flux Balance Analysis Number BBL7XX0 
Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P 
[C] 
3–0–0[3] 
Offered for M.Tech Type Elective  
Prerequisite Nil   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide an introduction to flux balance analysis (FBA), reactions,  metabolites, & pathways, 
mass balanced linear equations, biomass reaction, how to create a stoichiometric matrix from 
reactions and metabolites, gene-protein-reaction associations, constraint-based modeling. 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Implement knowledge of important concepts related to the FBA 
2. To apply them to model the behavior of biological systems as well as develop st rategies for 
manipulating them. 
Contents 
Flux Balance Analysis Overview: Overview, Formulation of Flux Balance Analysis [1 Lecture] 
Reactions, Metabolites, & Pathways:  Identifying Metabolic Reactions and Metabolites (Gene -
Protein-Reactions), Desired Reaction Information, Genome -scale Reconstruction Reactions, 
Desired Metabolit e Information, Genome -scale Reconstruction Metabolites, Metabolic Pathway, 
System Boundaries:Exchange & Transport Reactions, Genome -scale Metabolic Reconstructions, 
Reconstruction Process: 96 Step Protocol, E.coli Core Model [14 Lectures] 
Mathematical Repr esentation of Reactions & Constraints:  Creating A Stoichiometric Matrix, 
Genome-scale Metabolic Reconstruction [2 Lectures] 
Mass Balanced Linear Equations:  How can we use the Stoichiometric Matrix?, Dynamic Mass 
Balance, The Conceptual Basis of Constraint -based Modeling, Role of Constraints, Flux 
Optimization [6 Lectures] 
Biomass Reaction:  Biomass Precursors, E.coli Precursor Metabolites, Maintenance Energy 
Requirements, Biomass Reaction For E.coli Core Model, Biomass Objective Function, Formulation 
of Flux Balance Analysis, E.coli Core Model [8 Lectures] 
Calculating Fluxes:  Cobra Toolbox, Matlab, Drawing Flux Values on a Map, Print Flux Values, 
Examples [8 Lectures] 
Flux Balance Analysis Toolbox:  Methods in Constraint -based Reconstruction and Analysis [3 
Lectures] 
Textbook 
1.Palsson B. O., (2006), Systems Biology: Properties of Reconstru cted Networks, cambridge 
Press. 
Self Learning Material 
1. Utah State University, https://systemsbiology.usu.edu/syllabus.php 
 
 
409 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 
https://nptel.ac.in/noc/individual_course.php?id=noc18-bt22 
  
410 
 
Title Systems Biology in Personalized Genomics Number BBL7XX0 
Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P 
[C] 
3–0–0[3] 
Offered for M.Tech Type Elective  
Prerequisite Nil   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Illustrate “big-data” problems in personalized genomics by discussing recent publications 
2. Provide training in high dimensional biological data analysis 
3. Familiarize the participants with the use of statistical tools and principles for an alyzing 
genomic/epigenomic data 
Learning Outcomes 
It will enable participants to utilize the methods pr esented in this course for analyzing biological 
data. The course introduces the current research challenges faced in the field of  computational 
systems biology. 
Contents 
Course Overview and Introduction:  Design Principles of Complex Systems, Introduction to 
Genomics and Systems Biology [2 lectures] 
Topological and Network Evolution Models:  Small-World and Scale -Free Networks, Duplication -
Divergence, Complex Models of Network Evolution, Network Properties of Biological Networks [6 
lectures] 
Types of Biological Networks:  Types of Biological Networks, Genes2Networks and Network 
Visualization, Sets2Networks - Creating Functional Association Networks, Genes2FANs - Analyzing 
Gene Lists with Functional Association Networks [4 lectures] 
Data Processing and Identifying Differentially Expressed Genes:  Data Normalization, Univariate 
and multivariate methods for identifying differentially expressed gene sets  - Part 1, Univariate 
methods (SAM, Welch‟s t -test, LIMMA,) - Part 2, Multivariate method (Principal Component 
Analysis; Gene Set Enrichment Analysis; Supervised and unsupervised machine learning for data 
classification, including Clustering, SVM and KNN) [15 lectures] 
Analytical Tools for Genomics:  Enrichment Analysis and Enrichr, GEO2Enrichr: A Google Chrome 
Extension for Gene Set Extraction and Enrichment, Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) - 
Preliminaries, Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA), Principal Angle Enrichment Analysis (PAEA), 
Network2Canvas (N2C) and E nrichment Analysis with N2C, Expression2Kinases: Inferring 
Pathways from Differentially Expressed Genes, DrugPairSeeker and the New CMAP, Classifying 
Patients/Tumors from TCGA [15lectures] 
Textbook 
1.    Ma'ayan A. and MacArthur B. D. (eds.) (2012), New Frontiers of Network Analysis in Systems 
Biology, Springer. 
 
411 
 
Reference Books 
Research literature 
Self learning materials 
1. Mount Sinai Center for Bioinformatics, https://www.coursera.org/learn/network-biology 
  
412 
 
Title Artificial Intelligence in Bioengineering 
Lab 
Number BBP7XX0 
Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 0-0-2 [1] 
Offered for  Type Open 
Elective  
Prerequisite Machine Learning-1   
 
Objective: 
The instructor will: 
1. prepare industry relevant advanced cross -disciplinary skills in machine learning 
applications in bioengineering. 
Learning Outcome 
The students will have an ability to: 
1. comprehend fundamental concepts and hands -on techniques of the state -of-the-
art data science and deep learning methodologies 
2. apply popular unsupervised learning methods, including clustering methodologies 
and supervised methods such as deep neural networks 
3. master techniques in modern data analysis to leverage big datasets from omics, 
image and sensors; use pyspark skillfully to analyze big data 
  
Laboratory Experiments 
Introduction: data types, big data processing using pyspark (3 labs) 
Machine learning applications : supervised and unsupervised techniques for omics 
data integration and analysis (4 labs) 
Deep learning: applications in omics, image and sensor data (7 labs) 
Textbook 
1. Shalev-Shwartz,S., Ben-David,S., (2014), Understanding Machine Learning: From 
Theory to Algorithms, Cambridge University Press 
2. Tseng,G., Ghosh,D., Zhou X.J., (2015), Integrating Omics Data,  Cambridge 
University Press 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Department of Computer Science, Stanford University 
https://see.stanford.edu/Course/CS229 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. https://www.tutorialspoint.com/pyspark/ 
 
 
413 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Program Elective Set 5 
Biomaterials Engineering 
  
414 
 
 
Title Biophysics Number BBL7XX0 
Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [D] 2-0-0 [2] 
Offered for M.Tech Students Type Elective 
Prerequisite Nil   
 
Objectives:  
1. To learn the fundamentals of biological problems tackled by biophysicists ranging from 
the structure of small molecules to organs or physiological functions.  
Learning Outcome:   
The students will have an ability to  
1. Understand selected biological phenomena using physical principles.  
2. Utilize physical methods in the study of biological systems.  
Content: 
Introduction: Forces in living system, Thermodynamics of living systems; Conservation of 
energy in living systems, Entropy and Life, Gibbs and Standard free energy, Equilibrium 
constant, Coupled reactions.(7 lectures) 
Conformational stability of biomolecules:  Forces for protein stability, Protein denaturation 
and renaturation, Protein folding pathways, Levinthal‟s paradox, Molten globule, Folding 
accessory proteins, structural stability of DNA and RNA, biophysics of  chromatin packing (7 
lectures) 
Molecular self -assembly:  Organization of lipids in aqueous environment, Formation of 
vesicles, Transport of biomolecules: Diffusion, Osmosis, Facilitated diffusion, Active 
transport, function of ion channels Biophysical properties of cell membrane: Membrane 
potential, Action potential and resting phase. (7 lectures) 
Bioimpedance and biopotentials Cell motility:  mechanism of pseudopodia formation and 
ciliary movement, muscle contraction Cellular mechanotransduction, tensigrity model for 
bone remodeling, flow induced shear stress Molecular Techniques used in biophysics: Atomic 
force microscopy, optical tweezers,  patch clamp, FRET, confocal microscopy, super 
resolution microscopy, XRD and NMR. (7 lectures) 
Textbook:  
Cotterill Rodney M.J., (2014) Biophysics:introduction, John Wiley ISBN-13: 978-8126551606 
Reference book:  
Leake, M.C., (2017) Biophysics: Tools and Techniques  1st edition CRC Press ISBN -13: 978-
1138407374 
 Self-learning Material: 
https://www.biophysics.org/education-careers/education-resources/additional-education-
resource 
  
415 
 
 
Title Materials characterization Number MTL6XX0 
Department Material Science & Engineering L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 
Offered for M.Tech Type Elective  
Prerequisite Nil   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.Provide introduction to surface chemistry and physics of selected metals, polymers, 
and ceramics; surface characterization methodology; modification of biomaterial s 
surfaces; quantitative assays 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. understand areas of application based on bulk properties of implants; and acute and 
chronic response to implanted biomaterials. General topics include biosensors, drug 
delivery, and tissue engineering. 
Contents  
Introduction to the interactions between cells and the surfaces of biomaterials  Surface 
chemistry and physics of selected metals, polymers, and ceramics; surface 
characterization methodology; modification of biomaterials surfaces; quantitative assays 
of cell behavior in culture; biosensors and microarrays; bulk properties of implants; and 
acute and chronic response to implanted biomaterials. General topics include biosensors, 
drug delivery, and tissue engineering.  Experiments illustrating the principl es of quantum 
mechanics, thermodynamics and structure with intensive oral and written technical 
communication practice. Specific topics include: experimental exploration of the 
connections between energetics, bonding and structure of materials, and applica tion of 
these principles in instruments for materials characterization; demonstration of the 
wave-like nature of electrons; hands -on experience with techniques to quantify energy 
(DSC), bonding (XPS, AES, FTIR, UV/Vis and force spectroscopy), and degree of  order 
(x-ray scattering) in condensed matter; and investigation of structural transitions and 
structure-property relationships through practical materials examples. (14lectures) 
Textbook 
1.Ikada, Y., and H. Tsuji(2000), Biodegradable Polyesters for Medica l and Ecological 
Applications. Macromolecular Rapid Communications 21: 117-132 
2. Marazuela, M. D., and M. C. Moreno -Bondi (2002). Fiber-optic Biosensors - An 
Overview. Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry 372: 664-682. 
Self Learning Material  
1. Mayes, A. Materials for Biomedical Applications MIT OpenCourseWare Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, https://ocw.mit.edu. License: Creative Commons BY-NC-SA   
416 
 
Title Tissue Engineering & Medical Device Implants Number BBL7XX0 
Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech Students Type Elective  
 
Objective:  
1. The major objective of the course would be to give a brief introduction of Tissue 
Engineering, Medical Device & Implants and insights onto their use for generation of 
Medical Devices. Highlight current understanding, challenges and future applicative 
potentials of Medical Device & Implants. 
 
Learning Outcomes:  
The students will have an ability to: 
1. Students completing the course would gain an introduct ive experience of the field and able 
to comprehend with common terminologies. 
 
Contents: 
BBL7XX1: Tissue engineering and dynamics [1-0-0] 
(fractal, 1)  Tissue Engineering Introduction: Introduction to tissue engineering, Cells as 
therapeutic Agents with exa mples, Cell numbers and growth rates Tissue organization, Tissue 
Components, Tissue types, Functional subunits. (7 lectures)  
Tissue Dynamics: Dynamic states of tissues, Homeostasis in highly prolific tissues and Tissue 
repair. Angiogenesis. Cell -extracellular matrix interactions - Binding to the ECM, Modifying the 
ECM, Malfunctions in ECM signaling. Direct Cell -Cell contact - Cell junctions in tissues, 
malfunctions in direct cell-cell contact signaling. Response to mechanical stimuli (7 lectures) 
BBL7XX2: Measurements of cell characteristics and Biomaterials 1 [1-0-0] 
(fractal, 2)  Measurement of cell characteristics: Cell morphology, cell number and viability, 
cell-fate processes, cell motility, cell function. Cell and tissue culture - types of tissue cultu re, 
media, culture environment and maintenance of cells in vitro, cryopreservation. Basis for Cell  
Separation, characterization of cell separation, methods of cell separation (7 lectures)   
Biomaterials in tissue engineering: Biodegradable polymers and polymer scaffold 
processing. 
In vivo cell & tissue engineering case studies: Artificial skin, Artificial blood vessels, Artificial  
Pancreas, Nerve Regeneration (7 lectures) 
BBL7XX3: Medical devices and implants [1-0-0] 
(fractal, 3) Medical Device & Implants Introduction: Medical Device Classification, Bioethics and 
Privacy, Biocompatibility and Sterilization Techniques. Concept Design and Principles of Medical 
Device:Implants  and Clinical Tools: Design Control & Regulatory Requirements. Introduction 
to specific medical technologies (7 lectures) 
Biopotentials measurement: EMG, EOG, ECG, EEG, Medical Diagnostics (In -vitro diagnostics), 
417 
 
MedicalDiagnostics (Imaging), Minimally Invasive Devices, Surgical Tools and Implants (7 
lectures) 
Textbook 
1. Lanza, R., Langer, R., Vacanti, J., (2018), Principles of Tissue Engineering , 4 th Edition, 
eBook  
Self Learning Material 
1. Swaminathan, S., Tissue Engineering, Sastra University,  
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/102106036/#  
Preparatory Course Material:   
1. Design of BioMedical Devices and Systems, Utsaah University, 
http://cpdm.iisc.ac.in/utsaah/pd233/ 
 
 
 
 
418 
 
Title Thermodynamics & Kinetics of Materials – 
Material properties 
Number MTL6XX1 
Department Material Science & Engineering L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 
Offered for M.Tech Type Elective  
Prerequisite Nil   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.Provide introduction to thermodynamics and kinetics of materials and their effect on 
material properties 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. understand areas of application based on thermodynamic properties  
 
Contents  
Treatment of the laws of thermodynamics and their applications to equilibrium and the 
properties of materials . Provides a foundation to treat general phenomena in materials 
science and engineering, including chemical reactions, magnetism, polarizability, and 
elasticity. Develops relations pertaining to multiphase equilibria as determined by a 
treatment of solution  thermodynamics. Develops graphical constructions that are essential 
for the interpretation of phase diagrams. Treatment includes electrochemical equilibria and 
surface thermodynamics. Introduces aspects of statistical thermodynamics as they relate to 
macroscopic equilibrium phenomena (14 lectures). 
 
Textbook 
1. Ikada, Y., and H. Tsuji(2000), Biodegradable Polyesters for Medical and Ecological 
Applications. Macromolecular Rapid Communications 21: 117-132 
    2. Marazuela, M. D., and M. C. Moreno -Bondi (2002). Fiber-optic Biosensors - An Overview. 
Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry 372: 664-682. 
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Mayes, A. Materials for Biomedical Applications  MIT OpenCourseWare Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, https://ocw.mit.edu. License: Creative Commons BY-NC-SA  
 
  
419 
 
Title Computational modelling in materials design Number MSL7XX0 
Department Materials Science & Engineering L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 
Offered for M.Tech Type Elective  
Prerequisite Nil   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide introduction to modeling and simulation, covering continuum methods, atomistic and 
molecular simulation, and quantum mechanics.  
2. Provide Hands -on training is provided in the fundamentals and applications of these 
methods to key engineering problems. 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand areas of application based on the scientific exploitati on of the power of 
computation. 
Contents  
Energy models from classical potentials to first -principles approaches: Energy models from 
classical potentials to first -principles approaches ; density functional theory and the total -
energy pseudo -potential method; errors and accuracy of quantitative predictions: 
thermodynamic ensembles, Monte Carlo sampling and m olecular dynamics simulations; free 
energy and phase transitions; fluctuations and transport properties; and coarse -graining 
approaches and mesoscale models. (7lectures). 
Case studies from industrial applications of advanced materials to nanotechnology:  
Several laboratories will give students direct experience with simulations of classical force  
fields, electronic-structure approaches, molecular dynamics, and Monte Carlo. (7lectures). 
Textbook  
1.Dieter,G.E., (1986), Mechanical Metallurgy, 3rd Edition, McGraw Hill Book Company 
2. Courtney,T.H., (2005), Mechanical Behaviour of Materials , 2nd Edition, Waveland Press 
Inc. 
3. Shetty,M.N., (2013), Dislocations and Mechanical Behaviour of Materials , Prentice Hall  
India Learning Private Limited 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Bauri,R.,  Introduction to Materials Science and Engineering, NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Metallurgical & Materials Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113106032/       
2. vanVliet,K., 3.22 Mechanical Behavior of Materials , Spring 2008, MIT OpenCourseWare 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, https://ocw.mit.edu. License: Creative Commons 
BY-NC-SA 
  
420 
 
Title Biomechanics Number BBL7XX0 
Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [D] 2-0-0 [2] 
Offered for M.Tech Students Type Elective 
Prerequisite Nil   
 
Objective: 
The instructor will: 
1. Elucidate the role of Biomechanics in the field of Bioscience & Bioengineering with special 
emphasis on use in improving tissue repair and regeneration. 
 
Learning Outcome:  
The students will have an ability to: 
1. Understand and apply Biomechanics and their Fundamental Principles. 
2. Design the cutting edge applications of Biomechanics  
Contents 
Introduction to Biomechanics: Cellular Mechanics Static and dynamic cell processes; Cell 
adhesion, migration and aggregation; Mechanics of bio-membranes (7 lectures) 
Cytoskeleton and cortex: Microrheological properties and their implications; 
Mechanotransduction; Experimental methods - passive and active rheology, motility and 
adhesion assays (7 lectures) 
Tissue Mechanics:  Elastic (time independent); viscoelastic and poro -elastic (time-dependent) 
behavior of tissues; Continuum and microstructural models; Constitutive laws; 
Electromechanical and physicochemical properties of tissues; Physical regulation of 
cellular metabolism; Experimental methods - macroscopic rheology (14 lectures) 
Textbook  
1. Huston, R.L., (2014) Principles of Biomechanics, CRC Press 
2.  Koeppen, M., Bruce, A., Mosby, B., (2009) Stanton Berne & Levy Physiology, 6th Edition,  
Online Course Material 
https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/112106059/ 
 
 
 
 
421 
 
Title Biomaterials and Bioengineering Number BBL7XX0 
Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech Type Elective  
Prerequisite None   
Objective 
The Instructor will: 
1.  inspire future potential of bioengineering discipline 
2. provide cutting edge knowledge and applications of biomaterials in tissue engineering, drug 
delivery, biomechanics and reconstitution various biological events 
Learning Outcome 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. understand how biomaterials are useful for various biotechnological and bioengineering 
applications 
Contents 
Background and definition of biomaterials: classes of materials used biotechnological 
applications and in medicine: polymers, metals, ceramics, natural materials and composites, 
biodegradable polymers in medicine: polymers, liposomes, hydrogels, silicone biomaterials and 
medical fibers, degradation of materials in the biological environment, types of polymer 
degradation. influence of polymer properties on degradation, influence of biological 
environment on polymer degradation (14 lectures) 
Surface engineering of biomaterials: biological testing of biomaterials: in vitro assessment of 
materials for tissue compatibility, in vivo assessment of tissue compatibility. host reactions to 
biomaterials and their evaluations, the role of adsorbed proteins in tissue response to 
biomaterials. cell, extra cellular matrix, and tissue interactions with biomaterials, 
inflammation, wound healing and foreign body response to biomaterials. immune response to 
foreign materials. toxicity, tumor genesis and biomaterials (14 lectures) 
Microscopes for monitoring biomaterials and their dynamics: tirf and confocal, applications in 
drug delivery and nanomedicine, bioengineering concept to reconstitute cell like micro-
chambers: flow-chambers and artificial cell, bioengineered platform for monitoring microtubule 
dynamics, bioengineered platform for monitoring microtubule motility and organization, 
bioengineered platform for monitoring microtubule force, reconstitution of kinesin transport 
using engineered biomaterials, applications in brain injury, repairing and future applications 
(14 lectures) 
Textbook 
1. Latest Research articles (ChemBioChem, Molecular Biosystem, AngewChem, ACS Chemical 
Biology, JACS, ChemComm, ACS Chemical Neuroscience etc.) 
Self Learning Material  
None 
Preparatory Course Material 
None 
  
422 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Program Elective Set 6 
Bioenergy & Environmental Technologies 
  
423 
 
Title Bioenergy Systems  Course  BBL7XX0 
Department Bioscience and Bioengineering  L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1.  Acquaint students with the principles and applications of bio-energy harnessing systems 
ranging from conventional processes to the latest developments in the area  
2.  Enable students integrate two or more renewable energy processes to achieve a 
sustainable energy harvesting system 
                                                                                                                                                                                
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have an ability to: 
1.  Utilize biomass as sustainable fuel 
2.  Utilize the knowledge of bioenergy systems while integrating bioenergy with other 
renewable energy systems 
 
Contents 
Overview: Different bio -energy systems, sustainable bio -energy, different types of biomass 
(including forestry residues) and their processing, Principles of bio -energy harnessing by 
nature, Photosynthesis-natural solar energy capture process (6 lectures) 
Anaerobic fermentation technology: Biogas production, process, microbiology, different types 
of bioreactors, basic process kinetics(8 lectures) 
Biomass gasification technology: Syngas production process, different types of gasification 
reactors, factors affecting the process (6 lectures) 
Liquid biofuels [6 lectures]: Various types of biofuels,1 st and 2 nd generation biofuels, Algal 
Biofuels, ASTM standards for biofuels, Basic biochemical processes, engineering of biofuel 
producing organisms, metabolic engineering (6 lectures) 
Microbial fuel cells: Basic principle, Bioelectricity and different reactor configurations (4 
lectures) 
Artificial photosynthesis: Mimicking natural solar energy capture process, biohydrogen (3 
lectures) 
Downstream processes for product recovery: Basic processes like filtration, centrifugation, and 
solvent extraction(5 lectures) 
Applications: Technical uses of bioenergy, Systems Approaches to Bio -fuels Sustainability, 
positive environmental implications of bioenergy systems, Commercialization and 
424 
 
Economics of bio-energy technologies (4 lectures) 
Textbooks 
1. Vertes, A. A., Qureshi, A., Yukawa, H.,  Blaschek, H.P.,(2010) Biomass to Biofuels, Wiley. 
2. German Solar Energy Society, Ecofys, (2006) Planning and installing bioenergy systems: A 
guide for installers, architects and engineers, Earthscan,  
 
Reference Books 
1.  Stanier, R. Y., (2009) General Microbiology, W.H. Freeman and Co. 
2.  Pelczar, M.J., Chan, E. C. S., Krieg, N.R.,(2001) Microbiology, Tata McGraw - Hill Education 
Online course material 
1. Michelle O'Malley, Fueling Sustainability: Engineering Microbia l Systems for Biofuel 
Production, Spring 2011, MIT OpenCourseWare Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
https://ocw.mit.edu. License: Creative Commons BY-NC-SA 
 
  
425 
 
Title Environmental Biotechnology and 
Bioremediation 
Number BBL7XX0 
Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1.  acquaint students with the way wastes/wastewaters as well as toxic wastes are treated  
2.  teach methods pertaining to sustainable wastewater recycling 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have an ability to: 
1.  Understand increasing water, soil or air pollution because of industrialization and how 
biotechnology can circumvent these problems 
2.  design a treatment process based on the characteristics of the wastewater to be treated 
 
Contents 
Introduction: Basics of Microbiology, Stoichiometry and Bacterial energetics (5 lectures) 
Kinetics and Reactors: Microbial Kinetics and Biofilm kinetics, Reactor types, Mass balances, 
Batch reactor, Continuous stirred tank reactor (7 lectures) 
The activated sludge process: Characteristics of activated sludge, Process configurations, 
Design and operating criteria, aeration systems and sludge separation (5 lectures) 
Nitrification and denitrification: Bacterial physiology and basic process including biofilm and 
hybrid (4 lectures) 
Phosphorus removal: Normal phosphorus uptake into biomass, precipitation and enhanced 
biological removal (4 lectures) 
Drinking water treatment: Aerobic biofilm processes to remove biological instability, 
biodegradation and denitrification (4 lectures) 
Anaerobic treatment by methanogenesis: Reactor configurations, Process chemistry and 
Microbiology, Process kinetics (4 lectures) 
Detoxification of hazardous chemicals: Molecular recalcitrance, Biodegradation of problem 
environmental contaminants (4 lectures) 
Bioremediation: Scope and characteristics of contaminants, Biodegradability, Treatability 
studies, Engineering strategies for bioremediation, Biotechnological and genetics 
engineering approaches-creations of superbugs (4 lectures) 
 
426 
 
Textbooks 
1. Rittmann, B.E., McCarty, P.L., (2001) Environmental Biotechnology: Principles and 
Applications ,Tata McGraw Hill. 
Reference books  
1. Shuler, M., Kargi, F., (2002) Bioprocess Engineering: Basic Concepts , 2nd  edition Prentice 
Hall. 
2. Stanier, R. Y., (2009) General Microbiology, W.H. Freeman and Co. 
 
Online course material: 
1.  Gargi Singh, Applied Environmental Microbiology, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Civil Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/105107173/  
  
427 
 
 
Title Bio-electrochemical Systems   Number BBL7XX0 
Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B Tech.  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
1.  The instructor will acquaint students with Microbial fuel cell technology and the merits 
associated with the technology 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have an ability to: 
1.  utilize microorganisms with electricity production and design bioelectrochemical systems for 
various applications 
2.  understand a system involving electrochemistry, Microbiology, material Science & Chemical 
Engineering all in one go. 
 
Contents 
Introduction: Introduction to bio-electrochemical systems  (2 lectures) 
Electrochemistry: The Nernst equation and electrochemical potential difference, the redox  
reactions, calculating and measuring potentials (3 lectures) 
Microbiology: The exoelectrogenic microbes, microbial physiology, the electron donors, the 
electron acceptors. (3 lectures) 
Components & configuration: the anode, cathode, membrane, the connections, double 
chambered, Single chamber, air cathode and sediment type MFCS (3 lectures) 
Characterization: Electrochemical sensors, chronoamperometry, cyclic voltammetry, 
differential pulse voltammetry, Electrochemical Impedance spectroscopy, Optical  Sensors, 
colorimetry, fluorescence (7 lectures) 
Applications of bio -electrochemical systems:  Power generation, water treatment, 
bioremediation (4 lectures) 
Bio electrochemical system for Hydrogen production: Integrating MFCs with external power to 
generate hydrogen (2 lectures) 
Scope and the future: Integration of MFC with other energy generation technologies ( 4 
lectures) 
Textbooks 
1. Rittmann, B.E., McCarty, P.L., (2001) Environmental Biotechnology: Principles and 
Applications ,Tata McGraw Hill. 
428 
 
Reference books  
1. Shuler, M., Kargi, F., (2002) Bioprocess Engineering: Basic Concepts , 2nd  edition Prentice 
Hall. 
2. Stanier, R. Y., (2009) General Microbiology, W.H. Freeman and Co. 
 
Online course material: 
  
429 
 
 
Title Environmental Microbiology Number BBL7XX0 
Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 2-0-0 [2] 
Offered for   Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite       
  
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. Enable students utilize the knowledge of Microbiology for environmental cycling and 
enhanced agriculture productivity. 
  
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have an ability to: 
1. Understand the ecological interactions of Microbes in detail and will be able to 
associate the structure and function of a particular microbial community in a particular 
environment. 
2. Understand the soil plant interactions, how microbes make nutrients available for plant 
growth and how that helps in enhanced crop productivity. 
 Contents 
 Environmental and Agricultural microbiology: Microbial Ecology, Microbial   Evolution 
and Biodiversity, Interactions among Microbial Populations, Interactions between 
Microorganisms and Plants, Plant growth promoting bacteria, Microbial Interactions with 
Animals, Microbial Communities and Ecosystems, Measurement of Microbial Numbers, 
Biomass, and Activities, Effects of Abiotic Factors and Environmental Extremes on 
Microorganisms, Microorganisms in Their Natural Habitats: Air, Water, and Soil 
Microbiology, Biogeochemical cycling, soil, waste, water management, Microorganisms in 
Mineral and Energy Recovery and Fuel and Biomass Production. (28 lectures) 
  
Textbook 
1.    Atlas, R.M., Bartha, R., (2001) Microbial Ecology: Fundamentals and 
applications, Pearson 
2.    Jawetz, Melnick, Adelberg (2018) Medical Microbiology, 28th Edition McGraw Hill 
  
Reference Books 
1.    Brock, et al., (2012), Biology of Microorganisms, 13 th edition Ben,jamin 
Cummings, Boston, MA. 
430 
 
2.    Lehninger, A., Nelson, D.L., Cox, M., (2009) Principles of Biochemistry, W.H. 
Freeman and Co. 
 
Online course material 
1. David Schauer, and Edward DeLong. 20.106J Systems Microbiology. Fall 2006. 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology: MIT OpenCourseWare, 
https://ocw.mit.edu.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
431 
 
Title Water Energy Nexus Number MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P 3-0-0 
Offered for M. Tech and PhD Type Program Elective 
Objectives: 
1. Course designed to understand relation of energy of water use in our daily lives as well 
as water use for energy and food production. 
2. To enable plan pathways of water life cycle according the end-use requirements in 
municipal/ agriculture/ industrial environments. . 
  
Learning Outcomes: 
1. Ability to design energy/cost optimized systems according to location specific end -use 
requirements and water availability 
2. To have capability to locate correct locations where energy intensity as well as water 
efficiency measurements of the water transport within systems can be performed.  
 Contents: 
Introduction to energy -water nexus: Hydro -electric power production, Water Life Cycle in the 
different economic sectors 
Energy intensity (Joule/Litre etc.) definition, Equivalent electrical energy intensity [kWh/m3], 
Basic unit conversion, factors of energy conversion from thermal to electrical & vice versa 
Water extraction from ground as well as surface. Pumping efficiency, effect of lift and other 
influencing parameters, Different modes of surface water transfer. 
General overview of conventional water treatment energy use, Intro to thermal desalination, 
Membrane desalination systems, hybrid desalination systems .Renewable and non -renewable 
sources of energy and its influence of energy intensity . 
Discussion on water end -use based electrical and th ermal energy consumption. Electricity 
consumption in Residential water use: Clothes Washing, doing dishes, heating water, cooking 
water based foods. Commercial buildings and Energy use; Do buildings consume energy or 
the people within, Human behaviour and variation in energy consumption. 
Waste water recycling: review, of equivalent electrical energy intensity and operation of waste 
water treatment plant equipment and technologies. 
Agricultural water use and their energy intensity: Energy intensity of irriga tion water use with 
change in crops; change in irrigation technology, subsidy in electricity, human behavior; with 
variation in geographic land scape. 
Case study of water life cycle in various locations: USA, Ontario, Canada, China, Australia, 
India. 
  
432 
 
Text  books : 
1. C. Sommariva: Desalination Desalination and Advanced Water Treatment: Economics and 
Financing, First ed., Balaban Desalination Publications, Hopkinton, MA, USA, 2010.pg. 103.  
2. A K Plappally and J H Lienhard Energy Requirements for Water Produc tion, Treatment, End 
Use, Reclamation, and Discharge, Renewable and sustainable energy reviews (RSER), 
16(1) 
Self-learning Material: 
1. Sustainable Development: The Water Energy Food Nexus Aachen University 
https://www.edx.org/course/sustainable-development-the-water-energy-food-nexus 
2. Water-Energy Nexus Course of Studies at Irvine,https://www.water-energy-
food.org/resources/resources-detail/university-of-california-water-energy-nexus-urse-of-
studies-at-irvine/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
433 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Department of Physics 
 
Two-year M.Sc. Programme 
 
Curriculum 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
434 
 
Introduction 
Physics is one of the oldest disciplines of Science dealing with the development of a number of 
theories that attempt to explain the origin of the Universe and also various forces that exist in 
nature. Further, the genesis  of most of the Engineering Disciplines is based on various principles 
and theories of physics. Hence, the subject of physics, on one side deals with the development of 
fundamental theories towards revealing various processes and forces in nature and on th e other 
hand, it seamlessly interfaces with almost all disciplines of engineering wherein outcome of the 
research in physics can be translated into useful technologies and products thereby immensely 
contributing to the wellbeing of mankind. 
Objective of the Programme 
The major objective of the programme is to bring out professionals having knowledge of basic laws 
of nature together with strong fundamentals in the core area of physics viz. Classical Mechanics, 
Quantum Mechanics, Condensed Matter Physics, Ele ctromagnetism, Computational Physics, 
Statistical Physics, Electronics, Atomic and Nuclear Physics and advanced level topics such as 
Quantum Information Processing, Quantum Computing, High Energy Physics, Astrophysics, Plasma 
Physics, Nanotechnology, Nonli near Optics, etc. Further objective of the program is to inculcate 
certain specific enabling skill sets to prepare the students to take up challenges in any one or more 
functional domains viz. (i) Academics; (ii) Basic and Applied Research; (iii) Research & 
Development; (iv) Engineering & Technology and (v) Industry. 
Expected Graduate Attributes 
1. In depth understanding of the fundamental concepts of physics.  
2. Ability to undertake problems in multidisciplinary domains of Science & Technology viz. 
Space Scienc e, Medical Physics, Plasma Science, Quantum Technologies, Advanced 
Materials Science, Computational Techniques, etc. 
3. Ability to apply the acquired knowledge of Physics to Engineering Problems. 
4. Understanding of basic tools of computational physics and their  application in various 
domains of physics and engineering. 
5. Ability to perform the experiments and analyze the experimental data based on acquired 
knowledge in the domains of electronics, atomic and nuclear physics, condensed matter 
physics, optics and Lasers, and other advanced topics.  
6. Skills to demonstrate basic principles of physics by use of simple experimental as well as 
high end experimental techniques. 
7. Ability to develop advanced functional materials and carry out their characterization. 
8. Ability to design, fabricate and characterize device structures such as sensors, solar cells, 
optical components, etc. for various applications. 
9. Ability to make effective oral and written technical communication. 
10. Appreciation and adherence to norms of professional ethics. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Knowledge and deep understanding of principles of basic and applied physics. 
2. Subject knowledge to pursue higher studies in the advanced physics areas, such as, High 
Energy Physics, Astrophysics, Quantum Information Processing, Nanotechnology, Plasma 
Technology, Nonlinear Optics, Fibre Optics, etc. 
3. Knowledge of fabrication and characterization of devices, such as, solar cells, gas sensor, 
energy storage, magnetic data storage, etc. 
4. Skills in certain experimental techniques for characterization of materials for their structural, 
morphological, surface topology, electrical, magnetic, dielectric and optical properties.  
5. Knowledge and skills to use various vacuum based techniques for development of thin film 
based materials, structures, and plasma devices and systems. 
6. Technical knowledge and skills to understand and appreciate interdisciplinary research 
topics. 
435 
 
7. Skills in computational physics for wide range of applications ranging from the visualization 
of physical theories and process,  design of functional materials, simulation and modeling of 
optical processes, etc. 
8. Written and Oral technical communication skills. 
 
Program Structure: 
• 60% Core courses ~ 38 credits 
• 30% Program Electives (PE) (can be opted from a list specified by the department which can 
include courses from sister departments which are relevant for the programme) ~ 18 credits  
• 10% Open electives (OE) (OE can be opted from any department as per student‟s choice); 
~ 6 credits 
OE and PE can include lab courses as well as hands-on sessions 
• Project ~ 15 credits  
• Total Credits ~ 77  
 
 
 
 
 
  
436 
 
Credit Structure for M.Sc. Programs 
Type L-T-P-D Distribution of contact and beyond contact 
hours 
Total Credits 
= TH/3 
(TC) Contact 
Hours 
(CH) 
Beyond 
Contact 
Hours 
(BCH) 
Total 
Hours  
(TH) 
1 hour of Lecture 1-0-0-0 1 hr 2 hr 3 hr 1 
1 hour of Tutorial 0-1-0-0 1 hr 2 hr 3 hr 1  
1 hour of Lab/  
Hands On/ Seminar 
0-0-1-0 1 hr 0.5 hr 
 
1.5 hr 0.5 
1 hour of Project 0-0-0-1 1 hr 2 hr 3 hr 1 
Program Structure of M.Sc. Programmes 
Semester I Semester II 
Type Nos. CH BCH TH TC Type Nos. CH BCH TH TC 
Lecture 5×(3-0-
0-0) 
15 30 45 15 Lecture 5×(3-0-
0-0) 
15 30 45 15 
Lab 2×(0-0-
3-0) 
6 3 9 3 Lab 2×(0-0-
3-0) 
6 3 9 3 
Hands 
On 
1×(0-0-
3-0) 
3 1.5 4.5 1.5 Hands 
On 
1×(0-0-
3-0) 
3 1.5 4.5 1.5 
Total   24 34.5 58.5 19.5 Total   24 34.5 58.5 19.5 
Semester III Semester IV 
Type Nos. CH BCH TH TC Type Nos. CH BCH TH TC 
Lecture 4×(3-0-
0-0) 
12 24 36 12 Lecture 3×(3-0-
0-0) 
9 18 27 9 
Lab  1×(0-0-
3-0) 
3 1.5 4.5 1.5 Project (0-0-0 -
10) 
10 20 30 10 
Semina
r 
1×(0-0-
1-0) 
1 0.5 1.5 0.5       
Project (0-0-0 -
5) 
5 10 15 5       
Total   22 35 57 19 Total   19 38 57 19 
In a week: 84 hrs of working time assuming 12 hrs per day available for active work; 
after addressing curricular load demand students will have about 24 hrs of time for 
extra-curricular and co-curricular activities per week. 
 
 
437 
 
Semester wise courses (Total credits – 77) 
 
I Semester 
Cat. Course Number, Course Title L-T-P Credits 
MC PHL6XX0 Mathematical Physics 3-0-0-0 3 
MC PHL6XX0 Classical Mechanics 3-0-0-0 3 
MC PHL6XX0 Quantum Mechanics 3-0-0-0 3 
MC PHL6XX0 Electronics 3-0-0-0 3 
MC PHL6XX0 Statistical Physics 3-0-0-0 3 
MC PHP6XX0 Electronics Lab 0-0-3-0 1.5 
MC PHP6XX0 Condensed Matter Physics Lab 0-0-3-0 1.5 
MC PHP6XX0Hands-on 0-0-3-0 1.5 
Total 19.5 
 
II Semester 
Cat. Course Number, Course Title L-T-P Credits 
MC PHL6XX0 Electrodynamics 3-0-0-0 3 
MC PHL6XX0 Condensed Matter Physics 3-0-0-0 3 
MC PHL6XX0 Physics of Atoms & Molecules 3-0-0-0 3 
MC PHL6XX0Nuclear & Particle Physics 3-0-0-0 3 
ME Program Elective-1 3-0-0-0 3 
MC PHP6XX0Atomic & Nuclear Physics Lab 0-0-3-0 1.5 
MC PHP6XX0Optics & Lasers Lab 0-0-3-0 1.5 
MC PHP6XX0Hands-on 0-0-3-0 1.5 
Total 19.5 
 
 
 
 
438 
 
III Semester 
Cat. Course Number, Course Title L-T-P Credits 
ME Program Elective-2 3-0-0-0 3 
ME Program Elective-3 3-0-0-0 3 
ME Program Elective-4 3-0-0-0 3 
ME Open Elective-1 3-0-0-0 3 
MC Computational Physics Lab 0-0-3-0 1.5 
MC Seminar 0-0-1-0 0.5 
MP Project 0-0-0-5 5 
Total 19.0 
 
IV Semester 
Cat. Course Number, Course Title L-T-P Credits 
ME Program Elective-5 3-0-0-0 3 
ME Program Elective-6 3-0-0-0 3 
ME Open Elective-2 3-0-0-0 3 
MP Project 0-0-0-10 10 
Total 19.0 
 
 
  
439 
 
Topic Cloud 
 
 
  

440 
 
Topic Cloud Details 
 
Fundamental Physics 
1. Mathematical Physics 
2. Classical Mechanics 
3. Quantum Mechanics 
4. Statistical Physics 
5. Electronics 
6. Electrodynamics & STR 
7. Condensed Matter Physics 
8. Physics of Atoms & Molecules 
9. Nuclear & Particle Physics 
 
Multidisciplinary Science and Technology 
1. Computational Physics (Fractals with ME & Maths) 
2. High Energy Physics and Space Science 
● Introduction to Space Science 
● GTR 
● Particle Physics 
● Neutrino Telescope 
● X-ray Astronomy  
● Cosmology 
3. Nanoscience & Nanotechnology (Fractals with MT & CY)  
4. Advanced Condensed Matter Physics 
5. Introduction to Materials Characterization (Fractals with MT) 
6. Introduction to Medical Physics (Optical, radiation based, image analysis, MRI) (Fractals 
with BSBE, Electrical)  
7. Fundamentals of Plasma & Fusion Science 
8. Introduction to Quantum Technologies 
9. Laser Technologies 
10. Computational Materials Science (Fractals with MT and CY) 
11. Soft Matter Physics (Fractals with CY) 
12. Statistical methods for data analysis (Maths and Computers) 
13. Non-Perturbative Aspects of Quantum Field Theory 
14. Critical Phenomena and Renormalization Group 
 
Engineering Physics 
1. Optical Fibre Technology (Fractals with EE) 
2. Engineering Optics 
3. Energy Harvesting Technologies (Fractals with ME) 
4. Solar Energy Technologies (Fractals with ME) 
5. Quantum Optics & Engineering 
6. Cold Plasma Technologies 
7. Nuclear Engineering (Fractals with ME & EE) 
 
Teaching Laboratories 
1. Atomic & Nuclear Physics  
2. Condensed Matter Physics  
3. Electronics Laboratory 
4. Optics and Lasers 
5. Computational Physics 
441 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Core Courses 
  
442 
 
Title Mathematical Physics Number PHL6XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
1. To gain the mathematical skills necessary to approach problems in fundamental and 
advanced physics courses. 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply the mathematical skills in designing problems and solving them. 
2. Will enable students to apply different transforms to solve mathematical problems of 
interest in science and engineering. 
Contents  
Complex variables:  Analyticity and Cauchy -Reimann Conditions, Cauchy‟s integ ral theorem 
and formula, Taylor‟s series and Laurent‟s series expansion, Branch Points and Cuts, 
Reimann Sheets and surfaces, Residues, Cauchy‟s Residue theorem, Jordan‟s Lemma to 
evaluate infinite integrals, Evaluation of definite integrals. (12 lectures) 
Differential Equations and Special Functions:  Ordinary differential equations, second order 
homogeneous and inhomogeneous equations, Wronskian, General solutions, Series solution. 
Gauss hypergeometric and confluent hypergeometric equations, Sturm Liouvill e problem, 
Legendre, Hermite and the associated polynomials, Bessel functions, Integral representation 
of special functions, Applications to electrostatics and quantum mechanics. (16 lectures) 
Fourier and Laplace Transforms: Fourier transform, Sine, Cosine and Complex transforms with 
examples, Definition, Properties and Representations of Dirac Delta Function, Properties of 
Fourier Transforms, Transforms of derivatives, Parseval‟s Theorem, Convolution Theorem, 
Momentum representation, Applications to Partia l differential equations, Discrete Fourier 
transform, Fast Fourier transform, Laplace transform, Convolution theorem and its 
applications, Laplace transform method of solving differential equations, Applications to 
electrostatics. (14 lectures) 
 Textbook 
1. Arfken George, B. and Weber Hans, J., Mathematical Methods for Physicists , Academic 
Press, 2012.  
2. Boas Mary, L., Mathematical Methods in the Physical Sciences, John Wiley & Sons, 2005.  
Self-Learning Material 
1. Selected topics in Mathematical Physics, NPTEL course, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/115106086/ (by Professor V. Balakrishnan, Department of 
Physics, IIT Madras). 
2. Duan L., www-personal.umich.edu 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. Mathematical physics online NPTEL course by Dr. Saurabh Basu, IIT Guwahati. 
 
 
443 
 
Title Classical Mechanics Number PHL6XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide concepts and problem solving approach related to Lagrangian and Hamiltonian 
formulation in Mechanics. 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. To apply the Variational principles to physical problems. 
2. Model mechanical systems using Lagrange and Hamilton equation of motion. 
Contents  
Survey of elementary principles : review of the Newtonian mechanics, constraints, 
D'Alembert's principle, Lagrange‟s equation, Its application to simple problems. (7 Lectures)  
Central force problem : The equation of motion, the equivalent one -dimensional problem, 
classification of orbits, Virial theorem, Differential equation for the orbit, inverse square law 
of force, scattering in central force field. (7 Lectures) 
Variational Principles and Lagrange’s equations : calculus of variations, Hamilton's principle, 
derivation of Lagrange's equation from Hamilton's principle, its application, conservation and 
symmetry property. (6 Lectures) 
Small oscillations : formulation of the problem, eigenvalue equation, principal axis 
transformation, normal coordinates, triatomic molecule free vibration, forc ed and damped 
vibrations. (6 Lectures) 
Rigid body motion : orthogonal transformation, the Eulerian angles, Euler‟s theorem, 
infinitesimal rotation, tensors and dyadics, force free motion of rigid body, the heavy 
symmetrical top.  (5 Lectures) 
Hamilton's equ ation of motion : Legendre transformations and Hamilton's equation, cyclic 
coordinates, Routh's procedure, physical significance of Hamiltonian.  (5 Lectures) 
Canonical Transformation : Examples of canonical transformations, Lagrange and Poisson 
Brackets, symmetry group of mechanical systems. (6 Lectures) 
Textbook 
1. Goldstein, H., Classical Mechanics, Pearson India Limited, New Delhi (2011). 
Reference Books  
1. Jose, J. V. and Saletan, E. J., Classical Dynamics: A Contemporary Approach , Cambridge 
University Press, (2002).  
2. Landau, L.D. and Lifshitz, E.M., Mechanics, Pergamon Press, (1960). 
Online Course Material  
1. Banerjee D., Classical Mechanics,  Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, Kharagpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/115105098/. 
444 
 
Title Quantum Mechanics Number PHL6XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce the key concepts of non-relativistic quantum mechanics. 
 Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the basic concepts and working knowledge of non -relativistic quantum 
mechanics.  
 Contents 
Origin of quantum theory: Blackbody radiation, Photoelectric effect, Compton scattering, 
Matter waves, Uncertainty principle, Stern-Gerlach experiment. (5 Lectures) 
Formalism: Linear vector spaces and operators in Hilbert space, Measurements, observables 
and the uncertainty relations, Change of basis, Momentum representatio ns, Equations of 
motion in Schroedinger and Heisenberg pictures, One dimensional potential problems, Linear 
harmonic oscillator, Creation and annihilation operators. (10 Lectures) 
Theory of Angular Momentum: Angular momentum operators, Eigenvalues and Eige nfunctions 
of, Spherical harmonics Relation between rotation and angular momentum, Rotational 
symmetry and conservation of angular momentum, Reflection invariance and parity, 
Commutation rules, Matrix representations, addition of angular momenta and Clebsc h-
Gordon coefficients, Pauli spin matrices. (12 Lectures)   
Approximation methods: Time independent perturbation theory, Perturbation theory for 
degenerate states, Dalgarno‟s method, Zeeman and Stark effects, WKB approximation and 
its applications, Variati onal method and its applications to helium atom and many particle 
systems, Time dependent Perturbation theory, Fermi‟s Golden rule, Semi classical theory of 
interaction of atoms with radiation. (13 Lectures) 
 Textbook 
1. Shankar, R., Principles of Quantum Mechanics, Plenum Press, 1994. 
  Reference Books 
1. Das, A., Lectures on Quantum Mechanics, Hindustan Book Agency, 2003. 
2. Sakurai, J. J., Modern Quantum Mechanics, Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, 1994. 
 Self-Learning Material 
1. NPTEL Course Material, Balakrishnan, V., Department of Physics, IIT Madras 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/ 122106034/. 
2. Vuletic, V., Quantum Physics I, http://hdl.handle.net/1721.1/90372. 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. Susskind, L., https://www.courses.com/stanford -university/foundations-of-modern-
physics. 
 
445 
 
Title Electronics Number PHL6XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Make the students understand the basics of electronics. 
2. Make the students understand the use of electronic devices. 
3. Make the students understand to build circuit from individual components. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Design new circuits using the electronic components. 
2. Assemble analog and digital components to make new circuit. 
 
Contents  
Transistors: JFET, transconductance, JFET amplifiers, JFET switch, biasing in Ohmic region and 
active region, DMOSFET, depletion mode MOSFET, enhancement mode MOSFET, Digital 
switch, CMOS, E -MOSFET amplifiers, frequency response of amplifier, impedance matching, 
Bode plots, frequency analysis of FET. (8 lectures) 
Differential amplifiers and Operational Amplifiers:  differential amplifier, DC -analysis, AC -
analysis, input characteristics of an Op Amp, c ommon mode gain, loaded differential 
amplifier, the 741 Op Amp, Inverting Amplifier, Non -inverting Amplifier, two Op -Amp 
applications, negative feedback, VCVS voltage gain, ICVS amplifier, VCIS amplifier, ICIS 
amplifier, bandwidth. (8 lectures) 
Linear Op -Amp Circuit Applications: inverting amplifier circuits, non -inverting amplifier 
circuits, inverter/non -inverter circuits, differential amplifiers, summing amplifier circuits, 
voltage-controlled current source, automatic gain control, active filters, ideal r esponses, 
approximate responses, passive filters, first order stages, VCVS unity gain second order low 
pass filters, higher order filters, VCVS equal component low pass filters, Bandpass filters, 
Band stop Filters, All-pass filters. (6 lectures) 
Nonlinear Op Amp circuit: comparator with zero reference, comparator with non -zero 
references, comparator with hysteresis, integrator, waveform conversion, waveform 
generation, differentiator. (3 lectures) 
Oscillators: sinusoidal oscillation, Wein Bridge Oscillator,  RC Oscillator, Colpitts Oscillators, LC 
oscillators, Quartz crystals, the 555 timer, astable operation of the 555 timer, 555 circuit 
applications, the phase locked loop. (3 lectures) 
Digital Principle and Digital Logic : logic gates, combinational logic ci rcuits, SOP, POS 
representation, Karnaugh Map. (3 lectures) 
Data Processing Circuit : Multiplexers, demultiplexers, decoder, encoder, parity generator and 
checker, arithmetic circuits, adder, subtractors, clocks and timing circuits, 555 timer -
astable, monos table, flip -flops, RS, JK, D, edge triggering, registers, SISO, SIPO, PISO, 
446 
 
PIPO, application of shift registers, counters, asynchronous counters, synchronous counter, 
modulus of a counter, counter design, design of synchronous and asynchronous sequential 
circuits. (11 lectures) 
Textbook  
1. Malvino, A., Bates, D., Electronic Principles, McGrawHill, 2016. 
2. Leach, D. P., Malvino, A. P. and Saha, G., Digital Principles and Applications, TMH, 2014. 
3. Horowitz, P. and Hill, W., The Art of Electronics, CUP, 2016. 
 
Self-Learning Materials 
1. Aggarwal, A., Circuits and Electronics, 2007, MIT Open Course Ware : 
http://ocw.mit.edu/6-002S07. 
 
Preparatory Course Materials 
1. Dube, D.C., Electronics, Department of Physics,  IIT Delhi: http://nptel.iitm.ac.in. 
 
  
447 
 
Title Statistical Physics Number PHL6XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce various aspects of quantum statistics and its relevant applications in physics.  
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply the fundamental principles of statistical physics. 
Contents 
Thermodynamics: Basics, first and second laws; Maxwell‟s equation; extensive functions, 
Kinetic theory of gases. (5 Lecture) 
Conditions for phase equilibrium and stability: Multiphase equilibrium; stability. (6 Lecture) 
Statistical mechanics: Ensembles; non-interacting ideal systems. Partition function for various 
systems. (11 Lectures)  
Quantum statistics: Bose-Einstein and Fermi -Dirac distributions; black body radiation; Debye 
model specific heat, Bose-Einstein condensate. (8 Lectures) 
Statistical Mechanics for interacting systems: Introduction, Ising Model, Neumann‟s Liquid 
crystals. (5 Lecture) 
Critical phenomena: Mean field theory; Landau's theory; Curie -Weiss theory; Renormalization 
group. (7 Lectures)  
Textbook 
1. Landau, L. D. and Lifshitz, E. M., Statistical Physics, Part 1, Pergamon Press, 1980. 
 Reference Books 
1. Chandler, D., Introduction to Modern Statistical Mechanics, Oxford University Press, 1987. 
2. Huang, K., Statistical Mechanics, John Wiley and Sons, 1987. 
Self-Learning Material  
1. NPTEL course material, Balakrishnan, V., Department of Physics, IIT Madras 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/122106027. 
 
 
 
448 
 
Title Electrodynamics Number PHL6XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide the concepts regarding fields and forces in Electrodynamics and Magneto dynamics 
using basic scientific method. 
2. Basic understanding of relativistic electrodynamics and its applications in branches of 
Physical Sciences. 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Explain and solve problems based on classical electrodynamics using Maxwell‟s equation.  
2. To understand and proficiently carry out research by applying Classical relativistic 
electromagnetism using fundamental concepts of physical sciences. 
Contents  
Electrostatics, Magnetostatics and Electrodynamics : Gauss's law, Boundary value problems, 
multipoles, dielectrics, Biot and Savart law, Ampere‟s law, Faraday's law, Displacement 
current, Maxwell‟s equations, Wave propagation in Conductors and Dielectrics. (6 Lectures) 
Plane Electromagnetic Waves and Wave Propagation : Plane Waves in Non -conducting Medium 
Linear and Circular Polarization, Stokes Parameter, Reflection and Refraction of 
Electromagnetic Waves at a Plane Interface between Dielectrics, Fresnel Equation, Group 
Velocity Dispersion (GVD), Kramers-Kronig Relations.  (10 Lectures) 
Waveguides and Resonant Cavities: Fieldsat the surface of and within a Conductor; Cylindrical 
Cavities and Wave Guides, Resonant Cavities, Power losses in a Cavity and Q of a Cavity. (7 
Lectures) 
Simple Radiating Systems and Diffraction :  Fields of Radiation of localized oscillating Source, 
Electric Dipole fields and radiation and its application to radio waves. (6 Lectures)  
Radiation by moving Charges : Lienard -Wiechertz Potentials and Fields for a Point Charge, 
Total power Radiated by an Accelerating charge, Larmor‟s formula. (5 Lectures) 
Special Theory of Relativity : Minkowski Space and Four vectors, Concepts of F our-velocity, 
Four Acceleration and higher rank tensors, relativistic formation of electrodynamics, Action 
principle and Electromagnetic energy momentum Tensor. (8 Lectures) 
Textbook 
1. Jackson, J. D., Classical Electrodynamics, Wiley India Pvt. Ltd., 2007. 
Reference Books  
1. Lorrain, P.  and Corson, D., Electromagnetic Fields and Waves, CBS Publishers, 2003. 
2. Panofsky W.K.H. and Philips M., Classical Electricity and Magnetism , Dover Publishers, 
1990. 
Self-Learning course material 
1. Dighe, A., Electrodynamics, Tata  Institute of Fundamental Research, Mumbai, 
https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/115101004/. 
449 
 
2. Gut, A., Lecture notes on Electromagnetism II , MIT open course ware 
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/physics/8-07-electromagnetism-ii-fall-2012/lecture-notes/. 
 
  
450 
 
Title Condensed Matter Physics Number PHL6XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide the student with an extended knowledge of the principles and techniques of solid 
state physics. 
2. Provide an understanding of structure, thermal, electrical and magnetic properties of 
matter. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Formulate basic models for electrons and lattice vibrations for describing the physics of 
crystalline materials. 
2. Develop an understanding of the relation between band structure and the electrical/optical 
properties of a material. 
 
Contents  
Crystallography: Structural description of liquids and solids, External symmetry elements, 
Point groups, Direct periodic lattice, Basic concept of aperiodicity, Reciprocal lattice and 
diffraction conditions and its relation with Brillouin zones, Intensity of Bragg scattering from 
a unit cell and extinction conditions. (10 Lectures) 
Lattice Vibrations: Elastic waves, Enumeration of modes, Density of states of a continuous 
medium, Specific heat models of Einstein and Debye, Concept of phonon, Lattice waves, 
Lattice dynamics of crystals with up to two atoms per primitive basis, Density of states of a 
lattice, Thermal Conductivity, Scattering of X-rays, neutrons and light by phonons. (11 
Lectures) 
Electronic Properties of Solids: Electrons in periodic potential, Band Theory, Tight Binding, 
Cellular and Pseudo potential methods, Symmetry of energy bands, density of states, Fermi 
surface. (10 Lectures) 
Magnetism & Superconductivity: Introduction to types of magnetism, Curie-Weiss Law, 
Magnetic Domains & Hysteresis, Zero resistance, Meissner effect, Thermodynamics of the 
superconducting transition, Electrodynamics of superconductivity, BCS theory of 
superconductivity, Josephson effect. (11 Lectures) 
Textbook  
1. Kittel, C., Introduction to Solid State Physics, Wiley, 8th Edition, 2008. 
2. Ashcroft, N., W. and Mermin, N., D., Solid State Physics, Cengage Learning, 1976. 
3. Omar, M. A., Elementary Solid State Physics, Pearson, 2009. 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Rangarajan, G., Condensed Matter Physics, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Physics, 
451 
 
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/115106061/. 
2. Wen, X-G., Physics of Solids I, MIT open course, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/physics/8-
231-physics-of-solids-i-fall-2006/     
Preparatory Course Material  
1. Simon, H., S. (2013), The Oxford Solid State Basics, Oxford University Press. 
 
 
 
  
452 
 
Title Physics of Atoms and Molecules Number PHL6XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
1. To learn Atomic Physics with problem solving approach towards spectroscopy. 
Learning Outcomes 
1. The students will have an understanding of quantum behavior of atoms in external electric 
and magnetic fields. 
Course Content 
Hydrogen atom : Review of the Bohr atom model, solution of the Schrodinger equation, 
spectra of hydrogen and hydr ogen-like atoms. Review of time -independent perturbation 
theory. Fine structure of the hydrogen atom: spin-orbit coupling and relativistic correction to 
the kinetic energy. Review of the Dirac equation. Dirac equation in the non -relativistic limit. 
Zeeman and Stark Spectroscopy Hyperfine interaction in atomic Hydrogen. Spectroscopy 
with the 21 cm emission line.  Review of time-dependent perturbation theory. (11 Lectures) 
Interaction of electromagnetic radiation with a two -level atom. Rabi flopping : The dipo le 
approximation, electric dipole, magnetic dipole and electric quadrupole transitions. Selection 
rules. Transition probabilities and intensity of spectral lines. Line broadening mechanisms. 
Spontaneous and stimulated emissions and Einstein coefficients, m asers and lasers. Lamb 
shift. Quantization of the electromagnetic field. The Raman effect. Introduction to NMR and 
ESR. Review of Pauli's exclusion principle. The spin-statistics theorem. (11 Lectures) 
The Helium spectrum. Many electron   systems : Electron  configurations and spectroscopic 
notation, equivalent and non -equivalent electrons and Hund's rules. Hartree -Fock SCF 
method, proof of Koopmans theorem, Slater's approximation to exchange. Total Hamiltonian 
of a molecule. Born -Oppenheimer approximation. Rotational and Vibrational Spectra of 
molecules. Anharmonicity, Franck-Condon principle, Electronic. Infrared and Raman Spectra 
analysis. (14 Lecture) 
Molecular Physics: Molecular Orbital and Electronic configuration of Diatomic molecules: H2, 
C2, O2, NO and CN; Vibrational structure and vibrational analysis, Dissociation Energy, 
Rotational Raman spectra and influence of nuclear spin (6 Lectures)  
Textbook  
1. Bransden, B.H. and Joachain, C.J., (2004), Physics of Atoms and Molecules, Prentice Hall, 
2nd Edition, Pearson Education, Delhi 
References 
1. Condon, E. U. and Shortley, G. H., (1951), The Theory of Atomic spectra, Cambridge 
University Press  
Online Course Material 
1. NPTEL course material  Prof. T. Kundu, IIT Mumbai  
https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/115101003/ 
453 
 
Title Nuclear  and  Particle Physics Number PHL6XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide background to understand the role of nuclear physics in fundamental as well as 
applied aspects. 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Grasp the theoretical concepts of nuclear reactions and various nuclear models. 
2. Understand details of various applications of nuclear physics. 
 
Contents  
General properties of nuclei & Radioactive decay : Mass, radius, angular momentum, Magnetic 
dipole and electric quadrupole moment, Parity, Isospin, Radioactive disintegration and 
displacement law, α-particles, Geiger-Nuttall law, Quantum theory of α-decay, Continuous β-
spectrum, Neutrino hypothesis, Fermi theory of β -decay, Selection rules for β -decay, Parity 
violation in β-decays, Electric & magnetic multipole radiation. (8 Lectures) 
Nuclear Detectors and Accelerators: Interaction of charged particles and radiation with matter, 
Gaseous and Solid state detectors, Cyclic and Linear accelerators, Fixed target accelerat ors, 
Colliding beam machines. (5 Lectures) 
Nuclear forces: Deuteron problem, Low energy neutron -proton scattering, Spin dependence of 
neutron-proton interaction, Non -central force, Low energy proton -proton scattering, High -
energy neutron-proton & proton-proton scattering, Meson theory of nuclear force, Nature of 
two nucleon potential. (7 Lectures) 
Nuclear Models : Liquid drop model, Bether -Weizsacker formula, Nucleon mean potential, 
approximation by solvable potentials, Shell model, Collective model. (6 Lectures) 
Nuclear Reactions : Compound nucleus, Breit -Wigner formula, Evaporation model, Optical 
model, Heavy ion reaction, Phase transition and quark -gluon plasma; Nuclear fission, Bohr -
Wheeler theory, Fission reactors, Nuclear fusion and thermo -nuclear reacti on, Fusion 
reactors, Source of energy in stars, Solar neutrino problem, Nucleo-synthesis. (8 Lectures) 
Elementary Particles : Kinematics of high energy collisions, Pi mesons, Muons and their 
properties, Strange mesons, Hyperons, Resonance particles, Fundame ntal interactions in 
nature, Quark hypothesis of elementary particles, Classification of elementary particles, 
Conservation laws. (8 Lectures) 
Textbook 
1. Ghosal, S. N., Nuclear Physics, S. Chand, 2011. 
2. Burcham, W. E. and Jobes, M., Nuclear and Particle Physics, John Wiley & Sons Inc, 1995. 
 
454 
 
Reference Books  
1. Cohen, B., Concepts of Nuclear Physics, McGraw Hill Education, 2017. 
2. Wong, S. M., Introductory Nuclear Physics, Prentice Hall India Learning Pvt. Ltd., 1996. 
 
Online Course Material  
1. Verma, H. C., Nuclear Physics: Fundamentals and Applications, IIT Kanpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/115104043/ 
 
 
 
  
455 
 
Title Engineering Optics Number PHL6XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
1. This course provides comprehensive knowledge of optical science with elementary 
engineering applications. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. The students will become familiar with the concepts of optical sciences. 
2. Students will become familiar with working principles and applications of key optical 
components and devices.   
Contents  
Characteristics and Description of Light:  Photons, Uncertainty principle for Photons, properties 
of light beam (1 lecture) 
Geometrical Optics: Ray characteristics, Ray matrices for optical components, Ray propagation 
through optical elements and Imaging (2 lectures)  
Wave Optics and applications:  plane waves of monochromatic light, temporal and spatial 
coherence, Interference, interferom eter and applications, Fresnel diffraction, Babinet‟s 
principle, Fraunhofer diffraction, limit of resolution, N -slit diffraction, spatial frequency 
filtering and applications (9 lectures) 
Polarization of Light and holography : Stokes parameters, Jones and M uller matrices, 
Applications, anisotropic media, liquid crystals, in-line and off-axis holography, holograms (9 
lectures) 
Integrated Optics : Different type of waveguides, pulse dispersion in waveguides, planar 
waveguides, strip waveguides, guided wave devices (6 lectures) 
Lasers and Nonlinear Optical Devices:  The laser principle, Three - and four level lasers, Q-
switching and mode locking, He -Ne laser, CO2 laser, Laser Applications, Physical origin of 
nonlinearity, Electro -Optic effect, Second Harmonic gener ation, Optical Rectification, Sum 
and Difference frequency generation, nonlinear pulse propagation and solitons (9 lectures)  
Optical instruments:  The Eye, basic Camera, Projection Systems, Microscope, Telescope and 
resolving power of optical instruments (6 lectures) 
Textbook  
1. Ghatak, A. K., and Thyagarajan, K., Optical Electronics, Cambridge University Press 2017 
2. Saleh, B. E. A. and Teich, M. C., Fundamentals of Photonics, Wiley, 2018 
3. Yariv, A., Quantum electronics, wiley, 1989 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Barbastathis, G. and Sheppard C., Optics, 
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/mechanical-engineering/2-71-optics-spring-2009/ 
456 
 
Reference Course Material  
1. Ghatak, A., Optics, 2nd edition, Tata McGraw-Hill, 2000 
 
 
  
457 
 
Title Computational Physics Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
1. To incorporate modern computational skills into the scientific problem solving paradigm.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. The successful students will become familiar with commonly used numerical techniques to 
solve problems in physics. 
 
Contents  
(Fractal 1) PHL7XX1 Numerical Methods -I [1-0-0]  Solution of algebraic and 
transcendental equations: Iterative, bisection and Newton Raphson methods, Solution of 
simultaneous linear equations: Matrix inversion method (14 lectures) 
(Fractal 2) PHL7XX2 Numerical Methods -II [1-0-0] Interpolation: Newton an d Lagrange 
formulas, Numerical differentiation, Numerical Integration, Trapezoidal, Simpson and 
Gaussian quadrature methods, Least -square curve fitting, straight line and polynomial fits. 
(8 lectures) 
Numerical solution of ordinary differential equations : Euler and Runge -Kutta methods. (6 
lectures) 
(Fractal 3) PHL7XX3 S imulations: Numerical Methods  [1-0-0] Generation of uniformly 
distributed random integers, Statistical tests of randomness, Monte -Carlo evaluation of 
integrals and error analysis, Non -uniform probability distributions, Importance sampling, 
Rejection method, Metropolis algorithm, Molecular diffusion and Brownian motion as random 
walk problems and their Monte Carlo simulation. (8 lectures) 
Quantum Simulations : Time -independent Schrodinger equati on in one dimension (radial or 
linear equations), Scattering from a spherical potential, Born Approximation, Bound State 
solutions. (6 lectures) 
 
The students will be assigned computer laboratory work based on the above syllabus.  
 
Textbook  
1. Koonin, S. E. and Meredith, D. C., Computational Physics, Addison-Wesley, 1990. 
2. Tao Pang, An Introduction to Computational Physics, Cambridge Univ. Press, 1997. 
 
458 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/115104095/  
2. https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/115106060/ 
     
Reference Course Material  
1. Landau, R. H. and Mejia, M. J. P., Computational Physics, John Wiley, 1997.  
2. Thijssen, J. M., Computational Physics, Cambridge Univ. Press, 1999. 
 
 
 
  
459 
 
Title  High Energy Physics Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide background to understand the concepts of particle physics.  
2. Acquaint with techniques used in recent neutrino telescopes. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand concepts of Feynman calculus, details of QED and weak interactions. 
2. Learn results and future prospects associated with recent neutrino observatories. 
 
Contents 
Quantum field theory (QFT): Classical field theory: Lagrangian and Hamiltonian formalisms; 
Noether‟s theorem. This introduces the concept of sy mmetries in a consistent fashion. Need 
for quantum field theory: particles and fields, Charge conjugation and C Parity, Interaction 
of a spin-0 particle with an electromagnetic field.  (5 Lectures) 
Klein Gordon Equation: KG equation, The non -relativistic l imit, Free spin -0 particles, The 
charged KG field, Lagrange density and energy -momentum tensor of the KG -field, Lorentz 
Invariance of the KG equation.  (6 Lectures) 
Gauge invariance of the couplings, Lagrange density and energy -momentum tensor for a KG 
particle in an electromagnetic field, Negative Energy Solutions, Antiparticles, Gamma -
matrices and their properties, Covariance of Dirac equation, Charge conjugation, Parity & 
Time reversal invariance, Plane wave solution, Two component theory of neutrino, Sp in and 
Helicity. (6 Lectures) 
Quantum Electrodynamics (QED):  Feynman rules for QED, Electron -Muon scattering, Electron-
Electron scattering, Compton scattering, Casimir‟s trick, Mott and Rutherford scattering, Pair 
annihilation. (9 Lectures) 
Weak Interactions: Parity violation and the V -A form of the weak interaction, interpretation of 
the coupling G, Nuclear β -decay, Muon and pion decay, Charged current neutrino -electron 
scattering, neutrino quark scattering, Observation of weak neutral current, Neutral cur rent 
neutrino-quark scattering, Cabibbo angle. (10 Lectures) 
Neutrino Telescope: Interaction of Ultra -High Energy (UHE) neutrinos with cosmic microwave 
background, Askaryan effect, Relic neutrinos, Cherenkov based neutrino detectors, Antarctic 
Impulsive Tr ansient Antenna (ANITA) experiment, Antarctic Muon and Neutrino Detector 
Array (AMANDA) and Ice Cube experiments, ANTARES telescope, Next generation neutrino 
460 
 
telescopes. (6 Lectures) 
   
Text Books 
1. Griffiths, D., Introduction to Elementary Particles, Wiley-Vch 2010. 
2. Giunti, C. and Kim, C.W., Fundamentals of neutrino physics and Astrophysics , Oxford 
University Press; 1st edition 2007.   
 
Self-Learning Material 
1. Guth A., Lecture Notes MIT Course No. 8.323, Relativistic Quantum Field Theory I , Spring 
Sem., 2008. 
 
Preparatory Course Material  
1. Sakurai,J.J., Advanced Quantum Mechanics, Addison-Wesley 1967. 
 
 
  
461 
 
Title  Introduction to Space Science Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [2] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide introduction to space science. 
2. Provide introduction of cosmology 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Grasp different physical aspects of space science. 
 
Contents ((i) Introduction to Astronomy, (ii) General theory of relativity and Cosmology) 
 
PHL7XX1 (Introduction to Astronomy) [1-0-0] 
Basic observation of space:  Celestial coordinates, brightness, absolute and relative 
magnitude, sources of astronomical information, astronomy in different bands of 
electromagnetic radiation. (4 Lectures) 
X-ray Astronomy: X-ray emissions- Thermal, non-thermal: Bremsstrahlung, Synchrotron, X-
ray satellite detectors. Properties of stars: Colour and surface temperature, stellar spectra, the 
Hertzsprung-Russel diagram, size, mass and temperature of stars.  Celestial objects: The Sun, 
Neutron stars, classification of Galaxies, Exotic matter in space: dark matter. (10 Lectures)  
 
PHL7XX2 (General Theory of Relativity and Cosmology) [2-0-0] 
General theory of relativity: Principle of equivalence–gravitational forces–geodesic–Tensor 
algebra–tensor density–Killing vectors and symmetries Einstein's field equation. (8 lectures) 
  
Schwarzschild solution–Birkhoff's theorem - geodesic equation in Schwarzschild space time–
Precession of perihelion of mercury - gravitational frequency shift - Shapiro delay. (4 lectures) 
 
Cosmology: Olber's paradox: Why is the sky dark at night?, Expanding universe and Hubble's 
law, Finiteness and infiniteness of the universe. Evolutionary view of the Universe:  The paradox 
of thermal death, Thermodynamics of the expanding universe (Radiation under adiabatic 
expansion, Particles under adiabatic expansion), the negative thermal capacity of the solar 
system, structure formation. (10 Lectures) 
Thermal history of the universe:  Cosmic microwave background. Cosmological Models: 
Friedmann-Robertson Walker equation, Open, flat and closed universe, dark energy. (6 
462 
 
Lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. Narlikar, J. V., An introduction to cosmology, Cambridge University Press 2002. 
2. Carroll, S. M., Spacetime and Geometry, Pearson India Education Services 2018. 
3. M.Longair, High Energy Astrophysics vol 1, Cambridge University Press. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
1. Bertschinger E. & Taylor E. F., Lecture Notes MIT Course No. 8.224, General Relativity and 
Astrophysics, Spring Sem., 2003. 
2. Rappaport, S. A., and  Elliot, J., Introduction to Astronomy, 
https://dspace.mit.edu/handle/1721.1/34941 
 
Preparatory Course Material  
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/115105046/. 
 
 
  
463 
 
Title Nanoscience and Nanotechnology Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce physics of low dimensional objects and discuss changes in mechanical, electronic, 
magnetic and optical properties at reduced dimensions. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Obtain a flavor of nanoscience and nanotechnology and develop insight into the physical 
concepts behind nano-scale phenomena. 
2. Understand few nano-structures for practical device applications will also be discussed. 
 
Contents  
PHL7XX1 (Basics of Nanomaterials, Nanoparticles and Clusters) [1-0-0] 
(a) Quantum Confinement and definition of Nano: Electron states, energy bands and density of      
states for quantum Systems; Heterojunctions, Type I and Type II Heterostructures, Quantum  
wells, Quantum wires and Quantum dots, Effective Mass. (5 lectures)  
(b) Nanoparticles and Clusters: Metal nanoclusters, Magic numbers, Geometric structures,  
Electronic structures, Magnetic and semiconducting clusters and nanoparticles, Rare gas and  
molecular clusters, Carbon nanostructures, 2-D materials. (9 lectures) 
 
PHL7XX2 (Nanotechnology for Energy) [1-0-0] 
(a) Energy generation/storage: Dye sensitized solar cells, Quantum Dot sensitized solar cell,  
electrode materials for rechargeable batteries, supercapacitors, fuel cells, Hydrogen storage in  
carbon nanomaterials, nanocatalyst. (10 lectures) 
(b) Nanotechnology in data storage: Magnetic hard disk drive, Magnetic read and write head,  
Flash memory, Solid state drive, Future of data storage. (4 lectures) 
 
PHL7XX3 (Nanotechnology for Water and Healthcare) [1-0-0] 
(a) Nanotechnology in Water/Air purification: Nanomaterials for water and air purification,  
464 
 
Water desalination using carbon nanomaterials. (8 lectures) 
(b) Nanotechnology in healthcare: Diagnostics using nanomaterials, i.e., biosensors, drug 
delivery using magnetic nanoparticles, magnetic hyperthermia for cancer treatment. (6 
lectures) 
  
Textbook  
1. Poole C.P. Jr. and Owens F.J., Introduction to nanotechnology, Wiley-Interscience, 2003 
2. Shong C.W., Haur S.C. and Wee A. T. S., Science at the nanoscale, CRC Press, 2009 
3. Davis J.H., The physics of low-dimensional semiconductors, Cambridge Uni Press, 2012 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Quereshi, M., Department of Chemistry, IIT Guwahati, 
https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/104103019/. 
2. Online review papers in various journals. 
    
Preparatory Course Material  
1. Balani, K. and Subramaniam, A., Department of Material Science and Engineering, IIT 
Kanpur, NPTEL Course: https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/118104008/. 
 
 
 
  
465 
 
Title Advanced Condensed Matter Physics Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide training and knowledge to condensed matter physics of complex systems including 
both fundamental as well as applied aspects. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. The students are expected to have the ability to understand magnetism, ferroelectricity, 
opto-electronic properties and basics of soft condensed matter physics. 
 
Contents  
Magnetism and Ferroelectricity:  Dia/para magnetism, ferro, ferri/anti -ferro magnetism, 
superpara/superferro magnetism, magnetic domains, domain dynamics, introduction to 
magnetic resonance.Dielectric constant and polarizability, phase transition, ferroelectric 
crystals classification, d isplacive transitions, Landau theory of phase transition, first and 
second order transition, antiferroelectricity, ferroelectric domains and imaging. (11 lectures) 
Optical properties and plasmons:  Electron gas, dielectric function of electron, dispersion 
relation, plasmon, electrostatic screening, polaritons, Electron -electron and electron-phonon 
interaction, Kramer-Kroning relation, excitons, Raman effect. (10 lectures)  
Defects and Interfaces:  Surface crystallography, Surface electronic structure, 
magnetoresistance, Heterostructures, point defects, dislocations, Burger vectors, dislocation 
and crystal growth. (10 lectures) 
Soft Matter: Time and length scales, Colloids, polymers, liquid crystals and ionic soft matter, 
phase transition in soft matter systems. (11 lectures) 
 
Textbook 
1. Kittel C, Solid State Physics, Wiley, 2004. 
2. Ashcroft N. W., Mermin N. D., Solid State Physics, Saunders, 1976. 
3. R. A. L. Jones, Soft condensed matter, Oxford University Press 2002. 
 
Reference Books  
1. Sander M. Leonard, Advanced Condensed Matter Physics, Cambridge Univ. Press, 2009. 
2. Snoke W. David, Solid State Physics: Essential Concepts, Pearson, 2009. 
3. M. Doi, Soft matter physics, Oxford University Press, 2014. 
 
Online Course Material  
1. Rangarajan, G., Condensed Matter Physics, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Physics, 
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/115106061/. 
466 
 
2. Wen, X. G., Physics of Solids I, MIT open course, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/physics/8-
231-physics-of-solids-i-fall-2006/  
 
 
  
467 
 
Title Introduction to Material Characterization Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide an introduction to various characterization techniques for materials and devices  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Obtain basic idea of various techniques used to determine structural, compositional, and 
functional properties such as electrical, magnetic and optical properties of materials  
2. Appreciate the distinction between diffraction, imaging and spectroscopic based  techniques 
for material characterization 
 
Contents  
PHL7XX1 (Material Characterization by Diffraction and Electron Microscopy) [1 -0-0] 
(a) Introduction and Necessity of Material Characterization: Structural and functional 
properties  
of materials (2 lectures) 
(b) Diffraction based Characterization: Structure of crystalline and non-crystalline materials by  
x-ray diffraction, indexing of lattice planes and lattice parameter determination, electron and  
neutron diffraction, small angle scattering (9 lectures) 
(c) Introduction to Electron Microscopy: Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM). (3 lectures)  
 
PHL7XX2 (Characterization of Materials by Microscopy and Spectroscopy) [1-0-0]  
(a) Optical microscopy, Polarization Microscopy, Fluorescence Microscopy, Phase contrast  
Microscopy, Scanning Tunneling Microscopy (STM) and Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM)  
(b) Spectroscopic based Characterization: UV-Vis-NIR, FTIR, Photoluminescence (14 lectures) 
 
PHL7XX3 (Functional Properties of Materials) [1-0-0]  
(a) Electrical properties: Resistivity (Four probe and Van der Pauw method), 
Magnetoresistance  
and Hall effect. (5 lectures) 
(b) Magnetic properties: Magnetization and magnetic moment, Measurement of 
468 
 
Magnetization  
by force and by induction, Magnetic Hysteresis, Magnetic susceptibility, Principles of Electron  
Paramagnetic Resonance and Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR).(9 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Zhang, S., Li, L. and Kumar, A., Materials Characterization Techniques, CRC Press, 2008 
2. Mertz, J., Introduction to Optical Microscopy, 2nd Edition, Cambridge University Press, 2019 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Shankaran, S., Materials Characterization, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Metallurgical & Materials Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113106034/. 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
469 
 
Title Magnetism and Superconductivity Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce magnetism and superconductivity principles and their applications 
2. Impart advanced concepts of magnetic materials in modern research 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand atomic origin of spin and magnetism and get insight i nto manifestation 
of quantum mechanics at macro level.  
2. Grasp in-depth knowledge of magnetism and its modern application   
 
Contents  
Brief introduction: Magnetic moment, magnetic dipole, Magnetization and angular momentum 
(2 lectures) 
Isolated magnetic moment: Atom in a magnetic field, Susceptibility, Diamagnetism, 
Paramagnetism, Semiclassical treatment of paramagnetism, Langevin and Brillouin Theory  
Ground state of ion and Hund‟s rule, spin-orbit coupling L-S and j-j coupling, Adiabatic 
Demagnetization (8 lectures) 
Magnetic interactions: Dipole-dipole, Exchange, Origin of exchange, direct, indirect and 
anisotropic exchange (4 lectures) 
Magnetic Order: Ferromagnetism, Weiss model, Antiferromagnetism, Weiss model of 
antiferromagnetism, Ferrimagnetism, Helical order, Spin glass (5 lectures) 
Concept of broken order and symmetry, Landau theory of ferromagnetism, Phase transition, 
Magnons, Spin waves (4 lectures)  
Magnetic domains, domain walls, Anisotropy, Domain observation and Hysteresis (5 lectures)  
Band Magnetism: Free electron model, Pauli paramagnetism, Stoner criterion, Landau levels, 
Landau diamagnetism (5 lectures) 
Device applications: Magnetic data storage, magneto-optic effect, magnetic semiconductors, 
Giant Magneto Resistance, Spintronics devices (4 lectures) 
Superconductivity and related effects, superconducting materials and their applications, 
Josephson junction and SQUID (5 lectures) 
470 
 
 
 
Textbook  
1. Culity B. D. and Graham, C. D., Introduction to magnetic materials, Addison-Wesley, 1972 
2. Blundell, S., Magnetism in Condensed Matter, Oxford University Press, 2001 
3. Annett, J. F., Superconductivity, Superfluids and Condensates, Oxford University Press, 2004  
 
Self Learning Material  
1. O‟Handley, R., Magnetic Materials , MIT Open Course -Materials Science and  Engineering, 
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/materials-science-and-engineering/3-45-magnetic-materials-
spring-2004/index.htm 
     
 
 
  
471 
 
Title Introduction to Medical Physics Number PH7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The instructor will 
1. Introduce physics concepts and principles relevant for medicine and health  
2. Provide the introduction of modern diagnostic tools and various technology to medical 
research and to the healthcare arena in general that is set to revolutionize the way we cure 
diseases. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to get an insight into: 
1. Aspects of physics with engineering for biological applications  
2. Contribution of physics in the development of medical diagnostics  
 
Contents  
PH7XX1 (Radiological imaging techniques) [1-0-0] 
(a) Physics in Medical research: Interaction of radiation with matter, Interaction of photons  
with tissues, molecules, cells and organs, Elastic and inelastic scattering, Thomson and  
Compton Scattering. (6 lectures) 
(b) Radiological imaging: X-ray imaging and computerized Tomography (CT), Radioisotope  
imaging, Positron–emission Tomography, Introduction to the image analysis. (8 lectures) 
PH7XX2 (Non-radiological imaging techniques) [1-0-0] 
(a) Non -radiological imaging: Polarization Microscopy, Confocal Microscopy, Fluorescence 
Microscopy and Phase Contrast Microscopy, Breaking the diffraction limit in microscopy, 
Scanning near-field optical microscopy (SNOM), Principles of Nuclear Magnetic resonance and 
Magnetic Resonance Imaging, functional MRI. (14 lectures) 
PH7XX3 (Physics in Therapeutics) [1-0-0] 
(a) Plasma for Medicine: Introduction of low temperature plasma technology to medical  
research, plasma chemistry, fundamentals of non-equilibrium plasmas and cell biology. Cold  
plasma applications in the inactivation of pathogens, anti-bacterial coatings, wound healing,  
electrosurgery, cancer treatment and dentistry. (10 lectures) 
(b) Nuclear Medicine: Radioactivity, Production of radionuclides, Radiation therapy for 
cancer  
treatment. (4 lectures) 
472 
 
 
Textbook  
1. Cho, Z -H., Jones, J. and Singh, M.,  Foundations of Medical Imaging, 1st Edition Wiley 
Interscience, 1993 
2. Pryma, D. A., Nuclear Medicine, 1st Edition, Oxford University Press, 2015 
3. Murphy, D. B. and Davidson, M. W., Fundamental of Light Microscopy and Electronic 
Imaging, 2nd Edition, Wiley-Blackwell, 2012 
 
Reference Books 
1. Toyokuni, S., Ikehara, Y., Kikkawa, F. and Hori, M. (2018), Plasma Medical Science , 1 st 
Edition, Academic Press. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
1. Department of Electrical Engg, IIT Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108105091/  
2. Jasanoff, A., MIT Open courseware, Noninvasive Imaging in Biology and Medicine,  
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/nuclear-engineering/22-56j-noninvasive-imaging-in-biology-
and  
medicine-fall-2005/index.htm. 
 
Preparatory Course Material  
1. Department of Physics, IIT Delhi, https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/115102017/. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
473 
 
Title Electronic Transport in Mesoscopic 
Systems 
Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for   Type Elective 
Prerequisite      
 Objectives 
To understand the electronic transport mechanism in mesoscopic systems. 
Learning Outcomes 
Nanodevice fabrication will be much easier than before. 
Contents 
An atomistic view of electrical resistance : Energy level diagram, what makes electrons flow, 
the quantum of conductance, potential profile, Coulomb block ade, towards Ohm‟s law. (8 
lectures) 
Schrodinger equation and Self-consistent field: Hydrogen atom, Method of finite differences, 
the self -consistent field procedure, relation to the multi -electron picture, bonding, multi -
electron picture, basis functions as a computational tool, basis function as a conceptual tool, 
equilibrium density matrix. (10 lectures) 
Band Structure: Examples of 1D and 2D solids, common semiconductors, effect of spin -orbit 
coupling, Quantum wells, wires, dots, and nanotubes, density o f states, minimum resistance 
of a wire, velocity of a sub-band electron. (10 lectures) 
Capacitance and Level broadening:  Model Hamiltonian, electron density/density matrix, 
quantum vs electrostatic capacitance, open systems, local density of states, lifeti me, what 
constitutes a contact? (5 lectures) 
Coherent and Non -coherent transport:  Density matrix, inflow/outflow, transmission, 
overview of non -coherent transport, why does an atom emit light? Inflow/outflow, some 
ideas on phonons, atoms to transistor, qua ntum transport equations, physics of Ohm‟s law, 
where is the heat dissipated? Where is the voltage drop? (9 lectures) 
 Textbook 
1.    Datta, S., Quantum transport: atoms to transistor, 2011, 2nd ed. Cambridge University 
Reference Books 
2.    Zwanzig, R., Non-equilibrium statistical mechanics, Oxford University Press 
Online Course Material 
1. Datta, S., Fundamentals to Nanoelectronics: https://nanohub.org/courses/fon1  
  
474 
 
Title Physics of Solar Cells Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite      
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Make the students understand the physical principle behind different types of solar cells. 
2. Make the students understand the role of quality of light, types of materials, and device 
fabrication techniques. 
3. Make the students understand the inexpensive ways to fabricate the solar cells. 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Fabricate unconventional solar cells. 
2. Increase the efficiency of the solar cells by applying the theoretical knowledge. 
Contents 
Basic Concepts of Solar Cell: PV cells and modules, photocurrent and quantum efficiency, 
open circuit voltage, short circuit current, parasitic resistance (3 lectures) 
Role of light:  Solar resources, Equilibrium condition under illumination, available work, 
photocurrent, dark current.  (4 lectures) 
Properties of semiconductor: bands in crystals, density of states, electron distribution 
function, electron and hole densities, impurities and doping, drift current, diffusion 
current. (8 lectures) 
Generation and Recombination: semiconductor transp ort equations, generation and 
recombination, photogeneration, types of recombination. (5 lectures) 
Junction: Origin of photovoltaic action, metal semiconductor junction, ohmic contacts, p -n 
junction, p-i-n junction, p-n heterojunction, junctions in organic materials. (6 lectures) 
Analysis of p -n junction : formation of p -n junction, calculation of depletion width, 
calculation of carrier and current densities, p -n junction in dark, p -n junction under 
illumination, p-n junction as a photovoltaic cell. (8 lectures) 
Monocrystalline Solar Cells : Materials and Design, silicon material properties, band 
structure and optical absorption, doping, recombination and carrier transport. (3 
lectures) 
Thin film solar cells : Materials, amorphous silicon, defects in amorphous material, 
absorption, doping, stability, design of the solar cell. (3 lectures) 
475 
 
Strategies for high efficiency : multiple band gap, tandem cells, principles of cooling and 
hot carrier solar cell, impact ionization solar cells. (2 lectures) 
   
Textbook 
1.  J., Nelson, The Physics of Solar Cells, Imperial College Press, (2003),. 
 Reference Books 
1. P.,Wurfel, U., Wurfel, (2016), Physics of Solar Cell, Willey VCH. 
2. S.,Fonash, (2010), Solar Cell Device Physics, Academic Press. 
 Online Course Material 
1. Buonassisi, T., Fundamentals of Photovoltaics , 2011, MIT OpenCourseWare : 
http://ocw.mit.edu/2-627F11 
 
 
  
476 
 
Title Fundamentals of Plasma and Fusion Science Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. present the fundamental principles of basic plasma and plasma behavior by pointing out 
specific plasma properties useful in technological applications.  
2. Also, provide an overview of fusion plasma science and its consequences in the 21 st century 
for the benefit of mankind. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the important scientific and technical terms of plasma.  
2. Use mathematical knowledge in the solution of plasma physics problems. 
3. Recognize the importance of plasma based controlled thermonuclear fusion. 
 
Course Content 
Introduction of plasma - Plasmas in nature and applications, Relevant concepts from gas 
(kinetic) theory, Debye Shielding, Definition of plasma and relevant characteristic 
parameters, Collision rates and mean-free paths. (6 Lectures) 
Single particle motions - Charged particle motion in uniform electromagnetic field, Charged 
particle motion in non-uniform magnetostatic field, Charged particle motion in time varying 
electromagnetic fields, Adiabatic invariants. (4 Lectures) 
Plasma fluid theory - Continuity equations, Convective derivative, Equations of state, Single 
fluid approximation, MHD, MHD equilibria, Generalised Ohm‟s Law. (8 Lectures) 
Waves and instabilities in plasmas - Cold plasma waves, Thermal effects on plasma waves, 
Electron plasma waves, Electromagnetic waves in plasma, Equilibrium and stability, Two -
stream instability. (8 Lectures)  
Plasma generation and properties - Concepts of plasma generation in laboratory, Plasma 
sheath, Particle and energy balance, Scaling laws. (8 Lectures) 
Concept of Fusion Plasma Science - Thermonuclear fusion burn basics,  Fusion Reaction, 
Thermonuclear fusion,  Power balance, Ignition, Tokamaks, Fuel resources, Tokamak 
economics. (8 Lectures)  
 
Text Books  
1. F.F. Chen, Introduction to Plasma Physics and Controlled Fusion, Volume 1: Plasma 
Physics, NY, Plenum Press, 1984. 
2. John Wesson, Tokamaks, Clarendon Press- Oxford, 2004. 
 
477 
 
Reference Books 
1. R.J Goldston and Paul H. Rutherford, Introduction to Plasma Physics, Institute of Physics 
Publishing, Bristol 1995. 
2. R. Dendy, Plasma Physics: An Introductory Course, Cambridge, Cambridge University 
Press, 1993. 
 
Online course material 
1. Tripathi, V.K.,Plasma Physics: Fundamentals and Applications , NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/115102020/. 
 
 
 
  
478 
 
Title Introduction to Quantum Technologies Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide various facets of frontiers of quantum technological domains and its understanding 
from the beginner‟s perspective. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. In understanding fundamental principles of quantum state engineering. 
2. Apply modern quantum state engineered tools in advanced domain of physics 
 
Contents  
Non-classical States Generation : Generation of Single Photon, Heralded Photon and Photon 
added/subtracted states, NOON State. (6 Lectures)  
Random Number Generation (RNG) : True RNG Generation, Validation and relevant 
experimental details. (6 Lecture) 
Photon Statistics : Detailed analysis of Photon Statistics and higher -order moments for non -
classical states and quantum Metrology. (6 Lecture) 
Quantum State Engineering and tomography : Methods to generate engineered quantum states 
and its applications, Quantum State Tomography (QST). (6 Lectures)  
Quantum Cryptography: Introduction to Quantum Cryptography. (6 Lectures) 
Quantum Computation: Physical realization of quantum computers, and algorithms, qubits 
using photons and superconducting quits, modern quantum algorithms.  (6 Lectures) 
Open Quantum Systems : Introduction to Open quantum system and its Technological 
Implementation. (6 Lecture) 
Textbooks 
1. Agarwal, G. S., Quantum Optics, Cambridge University Press, 2012.  
2. Banerjee, S., Open Quantum S ystems: Dynamics of Nonclassical Evolution, Springer and 
Hindustan Book Agency, 2018. 
Reference Books 
1. Evans, M. W., Luks, A., Perina, Jan., Phase in Optics, World Scientific Publishing Company, 
1997. 
Self-Learning Material   
1. Prof Dipan Ghosh, Quantum Information and Computing Indian Institute of Technology 
Bombay, https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/115101092/. 
 
479 
 
Title Laser Technologies Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
1. This course aims to provide the student with a basic understanding of Lasers and an 
extended knowledge of the Laser-based technologies. 
Learning Outcomes 
2. The course provides students with knowledge of laser physics and introduces them to 
nonlinear optics, laser interferometer, and spectroscopy applications. Also, it provides a 
good understanding of the critical laser parameters important for their use in various real -
world app lications such as: quantum optics, quantum technologies, telecommunications, 
industrial material processing, sensing, bio -medicine, imaging, ranging and automobile 
industry. 
Course Contents  
Fundamentals of Lasers: Absorption, Spontaneous emission and Stim ulated emission, Einstein 
coefficients and their significance, Lasing mechanisms, Laser oscillator, Laser characteristics, 
Principles for operation of Lasers, modes and mode selection, Temporal & Spatial 
Coherence, comparison of laser with conventional sou rces of light, Laser Line width and Line 
broadening mechanisms, Gaussian Beams and optical resonators. (7 lectures) 
Types of Lasers:  rate equations, CW lasers, and Pulsed Lasers , Gas lasers, solid state lasers, 
semiconductor lasers, Dye Lasers and Fiber la sers, Spectral coverage with current Laser 
technologies. (7 lectures) 
Generation of short and Ultrashort pulses:  Q-Switching, Mode locking, Chirping and Pulse 
compression, YAG Lasers, State -of–art-lasers (Ti: Sapphire Lasers and Fiber Lasers). (7 
lectures) 
Nonlinear Optics:  Second and Third order nonlinear susceptibilities and nonlinear optical 
phenomena, Self -phase modulation in fibers, broadband and supercontinuum sources. (6 
lectures) 
Laser Interferometry:  Michelson & Mach -Zehnder Interferometer, Sagnac  Interferometer, 
HOM interferometer, Shearing Interferometer, and its connection to spatial Coherence, 
Fabry-Perot interferometer, LIGO, applications. (7 lectures) 
Laser Spectroscopy: Four -wave mixing, Terahertz generation (Optical rectification in a 
nonlinear medium), Transient absorption/reflection spectrometer. (8 lectures) 
Text Books   
1. Sigman, A., Lasers, Mill Valley, Calif. University Science Books, 1986 
2. Rulliere, C., Femtosecond Laser Pulses, Springer, 2003. 
3. Yariv A & Pochi, Y., Photonics, Oxford University Press, 2006. 
Reference books   
480 
 
1. Shen. Y. R., The Principles of Nonlinear Optics, Wiley-Interscience, 2002. 
2. Dexheimer. S. L., Terahertz Spectroscopy, CRC Press, 2008. 
Self-Learning course material 
1. Unique properties of lasers and their applications, Manabendra Chandra, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/104104085/. 
Preparatory course material 
1. Understanding Lasers and Fiber Optics, Prof. Shaoul Ezekiel 
https://ocw.mit.edu/resources/res-6-005-understanding-lasers-and-fiberoptics-spring-
2008/. 
 
 
  
481 
 
Title Computational Materials Science Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite      
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Help in understanding the physical properties of materials. 
2. Help in implementing the theoretical concepts to compute materials properties. 
  
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Learn theoretical concepts of different computational techniques in materials science. 
2. Simulate and compute material properties using density functional theory, molecular 
dynamics and Monte Carlo methods. 
  
Contents 
(Fractal 1) PHL7XX1 Basic concepts in Density Functional Theory (DFT) (1-0-0) 
   Uniform electron gas, Thomas -Fermi model, The Hohenberg -Kohn theorems, formulation of 
DFT, Kohn -Sham variational principle, Local/spin density approximation (LDA/LSDA), 
Generalized-gradient approximations (GGAs), Orbital dependent functional, Hybrid 
functionals, Introduction to Quantum Espresso. (14 lectures) 
(Fractal 2) PHL7XX2 Molecular dynamics Simulations (1-0-0) 
Equations of motion, integrators, Interaction potential models, Force calculations, Long -
range corrections, Molecular dynamics in various ensembles, Advanced MD techniques, 
Linear response theory and Introduction to LAMMPS & GROMACS. (14 lectures) 
(Fractal 3) PHL7XX3 Monte Carlo Simulations (1-0-0) 
   Monte Carlo integration, Importance sampling, Metropolis algorithm, Detailed balance, Free 
energy calculations, Widom insertion and Grand canonical Monte Carlo. (14 lectures)   
 
Textbook 
1. Sholl, D, and Steckel, J. A., Density Functional Theory: A Practical Introduction, Wiley-
Interscience 2009. 
2. Frenkel, D, and Smit, B., Understanding Molecular Simulation: From algorithms to 
applications, Academic Press 2001. 
3. Landau, D. P. and Binder, K., A Guide to Monte Carlo Simulations in Statistical Physics, 
3rd Edition, Cambridge University Press 2009. 
  
Reference Books 
1. Martin, R. M., Electronic Structure Basic Theory and Practical Methods, Cambridge 
University Press 2004. 
482 
 
2. Allen, M. P., and Tildesley, D. J., Computer Simulation of Liquids, Oxford University 
Press, 2nd ed. 2017. 
                                                                                                                     
Online Course Material 
1. MIT Open Course Ware, 3.320 “Atomistic Computer Modeling of Materials (SMA 5107)”, by 
Ceder, G. and Marzari, N.; Spring 2005, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/materials-science-
and-engineering/3-320-atomistic-computer-modeling-of-materials-sma-5107-spring-2005/ 
2. NPTEL course by Prof. Tembe, B. L., Department of Chemistry, IIT Bombay; 
“Computational Chemistry and Class Molecular Dynamics”; 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/104101095/. 
3. LAMMPS MD simulation package https://lammps.sandia.gov/index.html. 
  
483 
 
Title Soft Matter Physics Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite      
Objectives 
1. To understand theoretical concepts in soft matter physics. 
2. To understand the structural and thermodynamic properties of soft matter materials. 
  
Learning Outcomes 
1. Ability to apply statistical physics concepts to soft matter. 
2. Ability to appreciate the role of self-assembly, liquid crystals, macromolecular solutions 
in technological applications. 
  
Contents 
(Fractal 1) PHL7XX1 Fundamentals of Soft Matter Physics (1-0-0) 
What is soft matter?; time, length and energy scales; intermolecular forces; 
macromolecules; biopolymers; colloids, liquid crystals, membranes and self -assembly; (14 
lectures) 
(Fractal 2) PHL7XX2 Theory of Simple Liquids (1-0-0) 
   Densities and distribution functions; energy, pressure and compressibility, YBG hierarchy, 
virial expansion, hard -sphere equation of state and numerical calculation of Lennard -Jones 
systems (14 lectures) 
(Fractal 3) PHL7XX3 Polymer Physics (1-0-0) 
Random walks, model systems, distribution functions, chain statistics, coil -globule 
transition, polymer solutions, flexibility and semi -flexibility, self -avoidance, entanglement, 
viscoelasticity, reptation and Rouse models. (14 lectures) 
Textbook 
1. Doi, M., Soft Matter Physics, Oxford University Press 2014. 
2. Jones, R. A. L., Soft Condensed Matter, Oxford University Press 2002. 
Reference Books 
1. Chaikin, P. M., and Lubensky, T. C., Principles of Condensed Matter Physics, Cambridge 
University Press 
                                                                                                                     
Online Course Material 
1. NPTEL course by Profs. Sunil Kumar, P. B., and Menon, G. I.,; “Physics of Soft 
Condensed Matter”; https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/115106063/  
 
  
484 
 
Title Statistical Methods for Data Analysis Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite      
Objectives: 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide knowledge on commonly used statistical methods in analyzing physics data. 
  
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to, 
1. Understand statistical methods in analyzing physical data. 
  
Contents 
Basic Statistics and Common Probability Distributions: Probability, Random variables, discre te 
and continuous probability distributions, cumulative distributions. Mean, variance and 
covariance. Central Limit Theorem. Method of moments. Monte Carlo Methods: 
transformation of PDFs, acceptance-rejection technique. (8 Lectures) 
Bayesian Statistics: Likelihoods, priors and posteriors. Nuisance parameters, systematics 
uncertainties, and marginatization. (8 Lectures) 
Random and Systematic Uncertainties: Error bars and error propagation. Correlation and „error 
matrix‟. Non-Gaussian uncertainties. Techniques for managing systematic uncertainties. 
(8 Lectures) 
Parameter Estimation: Least square regression. Minimization techniques. “Robust” alternatives 
to the least square method. (8 Lectures) 
Statistical Tests: Hypotheses, test statistics, significance leve l, power, Neyman -Pearson test, 
statistical trials, likelihood ratio tests, Goodness -of-fit tests. Bayesian approach: posterior 
odds, the Bayes Factor, the Ockham Factor. Method of maximum likelihood. Statistical 
errors, confidence intervals and limits. (10 Lectures) 
 The students will be assigned computer laboratory work based on the above syllabus.  
 Textbooks 
1. Louis, L., Statistics for nuclear and particle physics, Addison-Wesley, 1990. 
2. Cowan, G., Statistical Data Analysis, Oxford University Press, 1998. 
  
Self-Learning Material: 
1. Sivia, D. S. and Skilling J., Data Analysis A Bayesian Tutorial , Oxford University Press, 
2nd edition, 2006. 
2. Martin, B. R., Statistics for Physical Science: An Introduction , Academic Press, 1 st edition, 
2012. 
Preparatory Course Material: 
485 
 
1. http://www-library.desy.de/preparch/books/vstatmp_engl.pdf 
 
 
 
 
  
486 
 
Title Optical Fiber Technology Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
1. To understand and gather knowledge on guided wave optics namely fiber optics and its 
applications. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. The students will become familiar with the concepts of modes, propagations of optical 
pulses, and nonlinear aspect of light matter interaction inside fibers. 
2. Students will become familiar with fiber characterization/measurement techniques and 
state-of-the-art applications.   
Contents  
(Fractal 1) PHL7XX1 Introduction to Optical Fiber [1 -0-0] Vector Nature of Light, Optical 
Fiber – Single and Multimode, Step index and Graded Index Fibers, Ray and Wave picture of 
propagation, Cut -off, mode field diameter, group delay, Gaussian field approximation. (8 
Lectures) 
Transmission Characteristics: The consequ ences of attenuation and dispersion in Optical 
Fibers: Material, Waveguide, Polarization, Intermodal and Intramodal Dispersion, Group 
velocity Dispersion, Dispersion modified single mode fibers. Fiber Fabrication Methods. (6 
Lectures)  
(Fractal 2)  PHL7XX2 Optical Fibers and Communication [1 -0-0] Attenuation, dispersion 
and pulse band width, refractive index profile, bend loss, other parameters. (5 lectures) 
Erbium doped fiber amplifiers: Optical amplification, gain spectrum and bandwidth, noise in 
EDFA, WDM. (4 lectures) 
Fiber optic communications- Dispersion management and WDM systems, bit -error rate, signal-
to-noise ratio, Optical communications. (5 lectures) 
(Fractal 3) PHL7XX3 Nonliear Fiber Optics  [1 -0-0] Photonic crystal fibers : Index and 
photonic bandgap guiding mechanism, endless single -mode guidance, fiber optic sensors. (7 
lectures) 
Nonlinear phenomena in optical fibers: Nonlinear refraction, nonlinear pulse propagation, self -
phase modulation, changes in pulse spectra, optical wave breaking, optic al solitons, cross -
phase modulation. (7 lectures) 
Textbook  
1. Ghatak, A. K., and Thyagarajan, K., Introduction to Fiber Optics, Cambridge University 
Press 1998. 
2. Agrawal, G. P., Nonlinear fiber optics, Academic press, 4th edition, 2007. 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Rastogi, V., Fiber Optics, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/115107095/.    
487 
 
Reference Course Material  
1. Crisp, J. and Elliot, B., Introduction to Fiber Optics, 3rd edition, Newnes, 2005. 
 
 
  
488 
 
 
Title Energy Harvesting Technologies Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Make the students understand different energy harvesting technologies from 
unconventional resources and waste energy management. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the energy harvesting technologies and their applications in different domains.  
 
Contents  
Energy sources: Non-renewable and renewable energy sources,  Energy demand and crisis 
nexus, waste energies and their harvesting (5 lectures) 
Harvesting Waste Mechanical Energy:  Principle of piezoelectricity, piezoelectric materials, their 
characterizations, common piezoelectric materials e.g. PZT, ZnO. Recent tren ds on new 
materials ceramics and polymer composites; Principles of energy harvesting using 
piezoelectric effect, Electrical equivalent modelling, examples of energy harvesting systems 
e.g. Human body motion based, human shoe based and human joint based ene rgy 
harvesters, Energy from natural sources: wind and water flow, Energy from transportation 
etc (15 lectures) 
Nanopiezoelectric materials and devices : Nanopiezoelectric effect, materials for 
nanogenerators, principles of nanogenerators, devices, character ization, current trends in 
materials. (7 lectures) 
Thermal Waste Energy harvesting: Thermoelectric effect and related principles, such as 
Seebeck and Peltier effect, Thomson effect, Thermoelectric device materials and 
characterization, Strategies for impro ving thermoelectric performance, Nanostructured 
thermoelectric materials; principle of pyroelectric effect, pyroelectric and electrocaloric 
coefficients, pyroelectric figure of merit, pyroelectric materials, Thermal phase change 
materials for waste energy harvesting, principles and materials. (10+05 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Priya, S., Inman, D. J., Energy Harvesting Technologies, Springer (2009). 
2. Mescia, L., Losito, O., Prudenzano, F.,  Innovative Materials and Systems for Energy 
Harvesting Applications, IGI Global (2015)  
 
489 
 
Reference Books  
1. Kazmierski, T. J., Beeby, S., Energy Harvesting Systems, Springer (2011). 
2. Yang, B., Liu, H., Liu, J., Lee, C., Micro and Nano Energy Harvesting Technologies , Artech 
House (2015) 
 
Online Course Material  
1. W. Tester, Jefferson,  Kazimi, Mujid S., Shao -Horn, Yang, Ghoniem, Ahmed F. 
Fundamentals of Advanced Energy Conversion,   
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/mechanical-engineering/2-60-fundamentals-of-advanced-
energy-conversion-spring-2004/# 
 
 
 
  
490 
 
Title Solar Energy Technologies Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Make the students understand energy technologies such as solar photovoltaics, solar 
thermal together with solar radiation. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the solar technologies and their applications. 
Contents  
Basic Concepts of Solar Radiation: Radiation fundamentals, types of radiation, measurements, 
and its usages. (10 lectures) 
Solar photovoltaics: Principles of solar cells, their types and working mechanisms, generation 
and recombination of carriers, types of recombination, Details about p -n homo and hetero 
junctions, inorganic and organic junction bas ed PV devices, analysis and characterization. 
Effect of temperature on device performance. (10 lectures) 
Solar thermal : Solar thermal technologies (concentrating and non -concentrating) and their 
operating principles, classification based on temperature ranges and their applications, 
Component analysis, Introduction to solar thermal plants and energy generation. (10 
lectures) 
Energy storage: Electrical energy storage using batteries and supercapacitors, principles, 
issues and challenges, current state of the art; Thermal energy storage using phase change 
and thermochemical means, principles, materials, issues and challenges. (10 lectures)  
Textbook  
1. Nelson, J., (2003), The Physics of Solar Cells, Imperial College Press. 
2. Sukhatme, S. P., Naik, J. K., Solar Energy: Principles of thermal collection and storage ; 
TMH, 2017. 
 
Reference Books  
1. Wurfel, P., Wurfel, U., (2016), Physics of Solar Cell, Willey VCH. 
2. Duffie, J. A., Beckman, W. A., Solar Engineering of Thermal Processes , John Wiley & Sons 
4th Ed, 2013. 
Online Course Material  
1. Buonassisi, T., Fundamentals of Photovoltaics, 2011, MIT OpenCourseWare : 
http://ocw.mit.edu/2-627F11. 
 
  
491 
 
Title Quantum Optics and Engineering Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide various aspects of nonclassical/quantum light and its manifestation. 
2. Basic understanding of novel applications of light matter interaction. 
3. Introduce various aspects of Photon distribution and its relevance to applications in 
quantum optics and engineering.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understanding the fundamental principles of quantum optics. 
2. The students will become familiar with concepts such as squeezing, lasing and atom optics  
3. Appreciate and apply quantum optics in newer frontiers of physics. 
 
Contents  
Introduction to Lasers (3 Lectures)  
Quantum theory of radiation: Quantum theory of the free electromagnetic field (3 Lectures) 
Coherent and squeezed states of radiation: Radiation from a classical current; coherent 
states; squeezed state physics and its detection.  (6 Lectures) 
Generation of Entangled Photons and Photon Statistics : Spontaneous Pa rametric Down -
Conversion (SPDC) process, Entangled photon detection, HOM and Franson Interferometer, 
Hanbury-Twiss Interferometer. (7 Lectures) 
Quantum distribution theory: Q, P and W distributions. (5 Lectures) 
Photon-photon interferometry: Photon detecti on and quantum coherence functions. (5 
Lectures) 
Atom-field interaction: Atom-field interaction Hamiltonian; density matrix of two -level atom 
with a single mode field. (7 Lectures) 
Lasing without inversion, coherent trapping, electromagnetically induced tr ansparency: 
Basic concepts of these quantum interference phenomena.  (6 Lectures) 
Textbook:  
1. Mandel, L. and Wolf, E., Optical Coherence and Quantum Optics, Cambridge University 
Press, 1995.  
2. Scully, M. O. and Zubairy, M.  S., Quantum Optics, Cambridge University Press, 1997. 
3. Loudon, R., The Quantum Theory of Light, Oxford University Press, 2000. 
 
492 
 
Reference Book: 
1. Agarwal, G. S., Quantum Optics, Cambridge University Press, 2012.  
 
Self-Learning Material: 
1.  Satyanarayana, M. V.,  Department of Physics, IIT Madras, Quantum Optics,  
https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/115106067/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
493 
 
Title Cold Plasma Technologies Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The instructor will: 
1. provide an overview of the importance of cold plasma technologies. 
2. present an overview of commercially important plasma sources, including the fundamental 
principles of their operation and diagnostics.  
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. understand the operating principles of the most sign ificant types of experimental plasma 
sources. 
2. acquire conceptual understanding of plasma measurement tools, different vacuum pumps 
and plasma systems design concepts.  
 
Course Content 
Electrical breakdown of gases - Background ionization, Saturation regime,  Townsend discharge 
and electrical breakdown condition of gases, Paschen Curve, Theory of low -pressure DC 
glow discharge. (10 Lectures) 
RF-driven gas discharges - Capacitive coupling, Inductive coupling, Microwave driven, 
Magnetically enhancement. (5 Lectures) 
High pressure gas discharges - Plasma Arc discharge and Glow discharge concept, Cold 
atmospheric pressure discharge, Dielectric Barrier Discharges, Cold Plasma Jets, 
Microplasmas. (5 Lectures) 
Vacuum Pumps and Instrumentation - Mechanical, diffusion, tur bo molecular pumps. Vacuum 
gauges, Gas regulators, Residual gas analysers, Leak detection. (5 Lectures) 
Plasma Diagnostics - Overview of plasma diagnostics, Langmuir probe, Magnetic probe, 
Emissive probe, Measurement of circuit parameters including current,  voltage and power, 
Fundamentals of emission of radiations by plasmas and their measurements. (8 Lectures)      
Laboratory Plasma Applications - Plasma treatment of surfaces, Plasma deposition of the 
surfaces, Plasma Etching, Cold plasma applications in hea lth, food and agriculture, Plasma 
Lighting devices, Nanoscale fabrications and plasma for biomedicines. (8 lectures) 
 
Text Books  
1. Yuri P. Raizer, Gas Discharge Physics, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 1991. 
2. J. Reece Roth, Industrial Plasma Engineering, Vol. 1 & 2, Institute of Physics Publishing, 
2003. 
3. P.I John, Plasma Sciences and the Creation of Wealth, Tata McGraw-Hill Education 
Company Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi, 2005. 
494 
 
 
Reference Books 
1. I. H. Huchinson, Principles of plasma diagnostics, Cambridge University Press, 1987 
2. Michael Lieberman and Allan J. Lichtenberg, Principles of Plasma Discharges and Materials 
Processing, John Wiley, 2005. 
 
Online course material 
1. Tripathi, V.K.,Plasma Physics: Fundamentals and Applications , NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/115102020/. 
 
  
495 
 
Title Critical Phenomena and Renormalization Group Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Help in understanding the basic concepts of critical phenomena. 
2. Help in grasping the concepts of the renormalization group 
  
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Grasp the concept of universality in phase transitions, crucial for understanding critical 
phenomena. 
2. Understand scaling and renormalization group ideas. 
  
Contents    
Introduction to critical phenomena: Phase Transitions and Transfer Matrix, Order Parameter 
and Cluster Properties, Stochastic Processes and Phase Transitions, The Ising model, 
the mean field, correlation functions. (10 Lectures) 
Landau theory:  The Landau theory of phase tra nsitions, Universality within the Mean Field 
Approximation, Critique of the Landau approximation, and the Ginzburg criterion, Power 
Counting and the Role of Dimension Four. (10 Lectures) 
Real-space Renormalization Group: Renormalization Group (RG) transformation of the 
Hamiltonian and its fixed points, Relations between critical exponents from RG, some 
applications of the linearized RG transformations. (6 Lectures) 
Momentum-space Renormalization Group: RG transformation in wave number space, 
Scaling dimension: anomalous and normal, Partition function and fixed points for the 
Gaussian model. (10 Lectures) 
Two-dimensional models: The X Y model, Nonlinear sigma-models. (6 Lectures) 
  
Textbook 
1.     Ma, S. K., (1976), Modern theory of critical phenomena. Benjamin, Philadelphia. 
2.    Bellac, M. L., (1991), Quantum and Statistical Field Theory, Clarendon Press, Oxford. 
  
496 
 
Reference Books 
1. Zinn-Justin., J., (1989), Quantum field theory and critical phenomena, Oxford University 
Press, Oxford. 
  
Online Course Material 
  
1. Santra, S. B., Advanced Statistical Mechanics , NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/115103028/. 
2. Kardar, M., 8.334 Statistical Mechanics II, Spring 2014, MIT OpenCourseWare 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, https://ocw.mit.edu 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
497 
 
Title Non-perturbative aspects of Quantum Field 
Theory 
Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Help in understanding the basic ideas of non-perturbative phenomena. 
2. Help in grasping the basic models of non-perturbative quantum field theory (QFT). 
  
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.     Grasp the concepts of QFT beyond the perturbation regimes. 
2.    Understand some of the important tools needed for non-perturbative QFT. 
  
Contents 
Introduction to general properties of QFT: Relativistic covariance, microcausality and 
ultraviolet singularities, Wightman functions and their properties; Euclidean QFT, 
Osterwalder-Schrader condition, local structure of QFT, Haag theorem; Schwinger 
model, Thirring model. (6 Lectures) 
Kinks and Domain Walls:  Humps of energy with a topological basis. Formation of kinks and 
domain walls during a phase transit ion, Kibble and Kibble -Zurek mechanisms. Action of 
kink and domain walls. (8 Lectures) 
Solitons and Instantons: Relativistic quantum field theories starting from classical solutions 
of the corresponding non - nonlinear field equations. Classical field equat ions belong to 
either the Minkowskian metric or to Euclidean equations. The Minkowskian solutions will 
have finite energy with a localised, non -dispersive energy density; referred to as 
solitons. Correspondence between classical soliton solutions of any gi ven field theory 
and extended-particle states of the quantised version of that theory will be discussed. 
Instantons are localised finite -action classical solutions of the Euclidean version of the 
field equations of any given model.  They lead to tunnelling  effects that can significantly 
affect the structure of the vacuum state. It will be discussed how the existence of a 
non-zero topological index, in the instantons, leads to the generation of a family of 
vacuum states, characterized by a vacuum angle theta. (20 Lectures) 
Non-Linear Sigma Model: Models possessing global symmetries non -linearly realized on the 
fields.  This model has an 0(N) symmetry, the field being a N -vector of fixed length. In 
this context, the 1/N expansion will be discussed. Also, discu ssed will be the connection 
of the O(2) model to the sine-Gordan and massive Thirring models. (8 Lectures) 
  
498 
 
Textbook 
1.     Rajaraman, R., (1989), Solitons and Instantons, North-Holland. 
2.    Abdalla, E., Abdalla, M. C. B., and Rothe, K. D., (2001), Non-perturbative methods in 2 
Dimensional QFT, World Scientific, Singapore. 
  
Reference Books 
1. Zinn-Justin., J., (1989), Quantum field theory and critical phenomena, Oxford University 
Press, Oxford. 
  
Online Course Material 
1. Govindarajan, S., Classical Field Theory, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Physics, 
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/115106058/. 
 
2. Hanany, A., 8.871 Selected Topics in Theoretical Particle Physics: Branes and Gauge 
Theory Dynamics, MIT OpenCourseWare Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
https://ocw.mit.edu 
 
 
  
499 
 
Title Nuclear Engineering Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide various aspects of Nuclear Engineering from perspective nuclear power plant and 
its safety.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. In understanding fundamental principles of nuclear engineering. 
 
Contents  
PHL7XX1  Nuclear Reactor and Safety  (2-0-0) 
Introduction to Nuclear Physics: (2 Lecture).  
Nuclear Decay Series : U, Th, Pu and Other radioactive sources and their decay series; basic 
understanding of differential cross-section and half-life. (6 Lecture) 
Nuclear Reactors: Reactor Physics and Pressurized Water Reactor, Boiling Water Reactor, Fast -
Breeder Reactor (FBR), Reactor Design (Heavy Water, Liquid Metal and Gas). (12 Lecture) 
Nuclear Safety : Reactor Safety, Structural Mechanics, Accidents and Contamination. (8 
Lecture) 
 
PHL7XX2  Fluid Flow and Power cycles   (1-0-0) 
Fluid Flow and Power Cycles: Single -Phase Flow & Two -Phase Flow, Heat -Exchangers Design 
and Different Power Cycles. (14 Lectures) 
 
Textbooks:  
1. Glasstone, S.  and Sesonske, A., Nuclear Reactor Engineering, D. Van Nostrand Company, 
1967. 
2. Knief, R. A.  Nuclear Engineering: Theory and Technology of Commercial Nuclear Power. 
2nd ed. La Grange Park, 2008. 
 
Reference books:  
1. Oka, Y., (Eds.), Nuclear Reactor Design, Springer-Verlag, Tokyo, 2010.  
 
 
500 
 
Self-Learning Material:  
1.  Kannan,  I.,  Department of Mechanical Engineering, IIT Bombay, Nuclear Engineering, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112101007/. 
 
 
  
501 
 
Title Vacuum Systems and Thin Film Technology Number PHL8XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite Introduction to Characterization & Advanced 
Condensed Matter Physics 
  
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce basic concept of vacuum science and thin film depositions & characterizations  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the physical concepts behind the thin film depositions by CVD and PVD systems 
2. Knowledge about vacuum pumps and gauges 
3. Design protocols for thin film deposition and characterization 
 
Contents  
Vacuum technology: Production of Vacuum - Mechanical pumps, Diffusion pump, Getter 
and Ion pumps, Cryopumps, Pressure Measurements Gauges, Leak Detection. (5 lectures) 
Physical Vapor Deposition: Hertz Knudsen equation; mass evaporation rate; Knudsen cell, 
Directional distribution of evaporating species, Evaporation of elements, compounds, 
alloys, Raoult‟s law; e-beam, pulsed laser and ion beam evaporation, Glow Discharge and 
Plasma, Sputtering–mechanisms and yield, DC and RF sputtering, Bias sputtering, 
magnetically enhanced sputtering systems, reactive sputtering, Hybrid and Modified PVD - 
Ion plating, reactive evaporation, ion beam assisted sputtering. (11 lectures) 
Chemical Vapor Deposition: reaction chemistry and thermodynamics of CVD; Thermal 
CVD, laser & plasma enhanced CVD, Chemical Techniques - Spray Pyrolysis, Electro-
deposition, Sol- Gel and LB Techniques (8 lectures) 
Nucleation & Growth: capillarity theory, atomistic and kinetic models of nucleation, basic 
modes of thin film growth, stages of film growth & mechanisms, amorphous thin films, 
Epitaxy–homo, hetero and coherent epitaxial layers, lattice misfit and imperfections, 
epitaxy of compound semiconductors. (8 lectures) 
Film Formation and Structure: Capillarity Theory, Atomistic Nucleation Processes, Cluster 
Coalescence and Depletion, Experimental Studies of Nucleation and Growth, Grain 
Structure of Films and Coatings (5 lectures) 
Methods for characterization of film properties: chemical composition, microstructure, 
optical, mechanical and electrical properties (5 lectures) 
 
502 
 
Textbook  
1. Ohring, M., The materials science of Thin films, Academic Press Ltd, 2nd Edition, 2002 
2. Chopra, K. L., Thin Film Phenomena, McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1969 
3. Smith D. L., Thin Film Deposition: Principles and Practice, McGraw Hill 1995 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Shekhar, S. and Gaur, A., Fundamentals of Material Processing Part 2 (Module 2) , IIT 
Kanpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113104075/ 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
503 
 
Title Plasma Diagnostics Number PHL8XX0 
Department Physics L-P-T (C) 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for PhD   
Prerequisite Cold Plasma Technologies   
Objectives  
The instructor will: 
1. provide an overview of the important plasma diagnostic and data analysis tools, which 
are used in process development and plasma reactor monitoring. 
2. provide students a critical appreciation of where and when specific techniques are 
applicable.   
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. understand the fundamental principles of electrical, optical and particle measurement 
techniques. 
2. understand quantitatively the validity of plasma measurements.   
3. distinguish process control issues and chalk out strategies for specific plasma process  
Course Content 
Plasma Parameters - Electron and Ion plasma densities, temperature, and particle 
distribution functions. Wall fluxes of charged and neutral species, ener gy distribution 
functions. Plasma emission. Plasma operating regimes. (7 Lectures) 
Electrical Measurements - Electrical Probes (Langmuir single, double probes, emissive 
proves), Current transformers, Rogowski coil, dielectric charging and laser heated 
techniques. (8 Lectures) 
Optical and Spectroscopic Techniques - Fundamentals of emission of radiation by plasmas. 
Corona equilibrium, Local -thermodynamic equilibrium (LTE), Collinsonal -radiative (CR) 
processes. Line shapes and broadening, i.e., Natural Broadenin g, Doppler Broadening, Stark 
Broadening, line shifts. Absorption spectroscopy and active techniques including LIF (Laser 
Induced Fluorescence) technique. (12 Lectures) 
Particle Measurements and Process Control - Energy analysers ( Ion-energy analyzers, 
Faraday Cup),  ion mass spectrometry, process gas analysis in plasmas, process control 
strategies. statistical process analysis, end point detection. (8 lectures) 
Data analysis software and tools- Data analysis introduction and overview of COMSOL, Vsim, 
Oopic-pro, Atomic Data and Analysis Structure, Interactive Data Language, Matlab and 
Origin. (7 lectures) 
Text Books  
1. I. H. Huchinson, Principles of plasma diagnostics, Cambridge University Press, 1987. 
2. P.I John, Plasma Sciences and the Creation of Wealth,  Tata McGraw-Hill Education Company 
Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi, 2005 
 
 
504 
 
Reference Books 
1. Lochte-Holtgreven, Plasma Diagnostics, AIP Press American Institute of Physics, New York 
(1995) 
2. P.C. Stangeby, Plasma Diagnostics, Vol. 2, Surface analysis and interactions, Academic 
Press, Boston (1989) 
Preparatory Course Material  
1. Ram Prakash, Book Chapter  “Recent Trends in Plasma Chemistry and Spectroscopy 
Diagnostics” Research Methodology in Chemical Sciences: Experimental and Theoretical 
Approach, Applied Academic Press, USA (2016). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
505 
 
 
Title Materials and device characterization Number PHL8XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite Introduction to Material Characterization   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce the advanced characterization tools for materials and devices 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the concepts and theory underlying the modern techniques employed to 
determine semiconductor material and device parameters. 
 
Contents  
Introduction to materials characterization and their necessity including physical, chemical 
and electrical characterization. (2 lectures) 
Structural and crystallographic Characterization: X-ray, neutron and electron diffraction, 
LEED, RHEED, characterization of crystalline and non-crystalline materials. (6 lectures) 
Microscopy techniques: Geometrical optics and optical microscopy, Scanning electron and 
Transmission electron microscopy. (10 lectures) 
Optical spectroscopy: UV-Vis and FTIR spectroscopy, Raman spectroscopy with introduction 
vibrational spectroscopic concepts. (4 lectures) 
Magnetic measurement techniques: SQUID magnetometer, temperature and field 
dependent magnetic measurements using PPMS and SQUID, introduction magnetic i maging 
techniques such as MRI and NMRI. (6 lectures) 
Electrical measurement:Drude model introduction, Four probe resistivity measurements, 
Van der Pauw method, Hall measurement, PN junction measurements, Schottky barriers, 
Thermally stimulated current spectroscopy. (6 lectures) 
Low temperature measurements: Introduction to cryogens, Dewars, He-4/3 cryostat, 
Dilution cryostat, Adiabatic demagnetization, Resistance thermometry. (4 lectures) 
Mossbauer spectroscopy techniques: Principle, method, experiments for material 
characterization, X-ray photoelectron/Auger spectroscopy measurements. (4 lectures) 
 
 
506 
 
Textbook  
1. Schroder, D. K., Semiconductor material and device characterization , Wiley 3 rd Edition, 
2015 
2. Zhang, S., Li, L. and Kumar, A., Materials characterization techniques, CRC press, 2008 
3. Egerton, R. F., Physical principles of electron microscopy: An introduction to TEM, SEM and 
AEM, Springer, 2005 
 
Self Learning Material  
1.Biswas, K., NPTEL course: Advanced Characterization Techniques , IIT Kanpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/113104004/     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
507 
 
Title Computational Condensed Matter Physics Number PHL8XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–1 [4] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite Computational Materials Science   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Help in understanding the condensed matter physics concept and their correlation in   
    materials properties. 
2. help students to implement the concept to apply for computing materials properties. 
3. Encourage students  to apply the computational condensed matter physics knowledge in 
their research if interested. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Learn the concept of condensed matter and computational aspects for real implementation  
2. Design application driven materials need  
 
Contents  
Basic Concepts in Electronic Structure: Interacting electron & nuclei systems, Forces & 
stress  
theorems, a bit of statistical mechanics and density matrix. Independent electron  
approximation, Exchange & correlation. Periodic solids and electron bands. Uniform electron  
gas model. (5 lectures) 
Hartee-Fock approximation: Non-interacting systems (2 lectures) 
Density Functional Theory (DFT): Thomas -Fermi model, The Hohenberg -Kohn theorems, 
Extension of Hohenberg-Khon theorems, formulation of DFT. The Kohn -Sham vibrational 
principle. (8 lectures) 
Functionals for exchange correlation: Local/ spin density approximation (LDA/LSDA), 
Generalized-gradient approximations (GGAs), Orbital dependent functional, Hybrid functionals. 
Electronic structure of atom and pseudopotential: scattering amplitude and pseudopotentials, 
orthogonalized plane wave (OPWs) and pseudopotentials, Nrom -conserving pseudopotentials, 
unscreening and core correction, Ultrasoft pseudopotentia ls, Projector augumented waves 
(PAWs) (16 lectures) 
Computation of electronic band structure: Self -consistent solution of coupled Kohn -Sham 
508 
 
equations, Total energy functionals, Force & stress (5 lectures) 
Practical applications: Introduction to supercells,  surfaces, interfaces, phonons and defects, 
other material properties such as magnetic, ferroelectric and piezoelectric properties. Thermal 
properties using phonon dispersion. (6 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Marder, M. P., Condensed Matter Physics, Wiley, 2000 
2. Sholl, D., and Steckel, J. A., Density Functional Theory: A Practical Introduction, Wiley-      
Interscience, 2009 
Reference Books  
1. Martin, R. M., Electronic Structure Basic Theory and Practical Methods , Cambridge 
University Press, 2004 
2. Kittel C. C., Quantum Theory of Solids, John Wiley & Sons Inc, 1987 
3. Journal articles for relevant sections 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Online resources: http://www.quantum-espresso.org/ (For computational purpose and 
online lectures and reading materials) 
 
 
 
 
  
509 
 
Title Semiconductor Device Technology Number PHL8XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite Advanced Condensed Matter Physics   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce basic properties of semiconductors, physical principles and operational 
characteristics of semiconductor devices 
2. Put forth advanced device issues relevant to state-of-the-art integrated-circuit 
technologies. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Familiarize with the physical concepts behind the solid state electronics devices 
 
Contents  
Physics and Properties of Semiconductors: crystal structure, energy bands, statistics, Fermi 
level, carrier concentration at thermal equilibrium, carrier transport phenomena, Hall eff ect, 
recombination, optical and thermal properties, basic properties for semiconductor operation. 
(5 lectures) 
Device Processing Technology: oxidation, diffusion, ion-implantation, deposition, 
lithography, etching and interconnect. (8 lectures) 
p-n Junction: depletion region, diffusion, generation-recombination, current-voltage 
characteristics, junction breakdown, charge storage and transient behavior. (4 lectures) 
Bipolar transistor: transistor action and dependence on device structure, charge control 
switching model, Ebers-Moll Model, current-voltage characteristics, non-ideal and limiting 
effects at extremes of bias. (6 lectures) 
State-of-the-Art Bipolar Transistor Technology: poly-si emitters, narrow base, structural 
tradeoffs in optimizing performance. (3 lectures) 
Metal-Semiconductor Contacts: equilibrium, idealized metal semiconductor junctions, 
nonrectifying (ohmic) contacts, Schottky diodes, tunneling. (4 lectures) 
Metal-Oxide-Silicon System: MOS structure, capacitance, oxide and interface charge 
(charging of traps, tunneling through oxide). (4 lectures) 
MOS Field-Effect Transistor: threshold voltage, derivation of current-voltage characteristics, 
dependence on device structure. (3 lectures) 
State-of-the-Art MOS Technology: small-geometry effects, mobility degradation due to 
channel and oxide fields, velocity saturation, hot-electron effects. (3 lectures) 
510 
 
Modern CMOS Technologies: CMOS Process flow starting from Substrate selection to 
multilevel metal formation, comparison between bulk and SOI CMOS technologies. (2 
lectures)   
Textbook  
1. Donald , A. N., Semiconductor Physics and Devices, Tata McGraw-Hill, 2007. 
2. Sze, S.M., Physics of Semiconductor Devices, John Wiley & Sons, 2001. 
3. James,P., Deal, M. and Griffin P., Silicon VLSI Technology, Prentice Hall, Electronics and 
VLSI series, 2000 
Self Learning Material  
1. Fonstad, C., Jr, MIT Open course: Microelectronic Devices and Circuits, 
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-012-
microelectronic-devices-and-circuits-fall-2009/index.htm 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
511 
 
Title Understanding Scanning Tunneling 
Microscope 
Number PHL8XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for   Type Elective 
Prerequisite Electronic Transport in Mesoscopic Systems     
 Objectives 
To understand the principles behind scanning tunneling microscope. 
Learning Outcomes 
One can get acquainted and operate scanning tunneling microscope. 
Contents 
Overview: Tunneling an elementary model, probing electronic structure in atomic scale, 
spatially resolved scanning spectroscopy, lateral resolution, origin of atomic resolution in STM, 
tip-sample interaction effects. (6 lectures) 
Imaging Mechanism:  atom-scale tunneling, perturbation approach, image force, the square -
barrier problem, modified Bardeen approach, effect o f image force on tunneling, tunneling 
matrix elements, tip wavefunctions, Green‟s function and tip wavefunctions, wavefunctions at 
surfaces, related model, concept of surface states, field emission spectroscopy, atom -beam 
diffraction, first principles theoretical studies. (10 lectures) 
Imaging crystalline surfaces: types of STM images, surfaces with one-dimensional corrugation, 
surface with tetragonal, hexagonal or trigonal symmetry, corrugation inversion, the S -wave-
tip model. (5 lectures) 
Imaging atomic states and the role of atomic force in tunneling:  Slater atomic wavefunctions, 
profiles of atomic states as seen by STM, Na-atom tip model, images of surfaces: Independent 
orbital approximation, effect of atomic force in STM, attractive atomic force as a tu nneling 
phenomenon, attractive atomic force and tunneling conductance. (11 lectures) 
Tip-sample Interactions and scanning tunneling spectroscopy:  Local modification of sample 
wavefunction, deformation of tip and sample surface, electronics for spectroscopy , nature of 
the spectra, tip -treatment for spectroscopy studies, The Fenestra parameter, ex situ and in 
situ determination of tip DOS. (10 lectures) 
  Textbook 
1.    Chen, C. J., Introduction to Scanning Tunneling Microscopy, Oxford University, 2012 
Reference Books 
2.    Weisendanger, R., Scanning Probe Spectroscopy and Microscopy, Cambridge Uni. 
 Online Course Material1.    Review of Quantum Tunneling/Introduction to STM : 
http://nanohub.org/resources/9600  
 
512 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Teaching Laboratories 
513 
 
Atomic and Nuclear Physics Laboratory (Course No. PHP6XX0) 
 
S. No. Name of the Experiment 
1.  Recording of Hydrogen Spectra  
2.  Zeeman effect 
3.  Gamma Ray Spectrometer (Energy resolved)  
4.  Alpha particle spectrometer (Energy resolved)  
5.  Radiation Counter for Alpha and Beta Particle (ZnSe for Alpha 
And Plastic scintillation counter for beta particle) 
6.  Radiation Counter for  
Gamma and Beta Particle 
7.  Finding the Plateau region of GM Tube   
8.  Alpha particle counter (only for alpha particle)  
9.  Compton Scattering 
 
Electronics Laboratory (Course No. PHP6XX0) 
 
S. No. Name of Experiment 
1 JFET biasing and its application as an amplifier. 
2 Differential Amplifier as double ended input and single ended output. Differential 
Amplifier as single ended input and double ended output. 
3 Op-Amp circuit and inverting and non-inverting amplifiers. Find out the output 
offset voltage, maximum output current, slew rate, and power bandwidth. 
4 Summing, subtractor, differentiator, and integrator. 
5 Four types of negative feedback such as VCVS, VCIS, ICVS, and ICIS will used to 
show the reduction of non-linear distortion and output offset voltage. 
6 Active Butterworth low-pass, high-pass, wide bandpass, and narrow bandpass 
filters. 
7 Active diode circuits and comparator as peak detector, limiter, DC clamper, limit 
detector. 
8 Wave shaping circuit by using Schmitt trigger. 
9 The Wien Bridge Oscillator, LC Oscillator circuit  
514 
 
10 Use of 555 timer for astable multivibrator, monostable multivibrator and construct 
an alarm circuit. 
11 Different logic gates such as NOT, AND, OR, NAND, NOR, XOR gates 
12 RS NAND latch, clocked D Latch, JK Flip Flop and verify frequency division 
function, T Flip-Flop,  
13 To study the performance of a quartz-controlled TTL clock oscillator. 
14 Monostable, astable multivibrator using TTL circuits. 
15 Half-adder, full-adder, subtractor, construction of four-bit adder, and four-bit 
adder-subtractor  
16 Use of Shift Register for showing SIPO, PIPO, and PIPO operation. 
17  Operation of a binary ripple up-counter, and down counter. 
18 Study the characteristics of a BCD to decimal decoder. 
19 To study the functioning of multiplexer and its application for the generation of 
Boolean functions. 
20 To demonstrate the functions performed by decoder using a seven segment LED 
display. 
21 To study the operation of a D/A converter based on a R/2R network 
 
515 
 
Condensed Matter Physics Laboratory (Course No. PHP6XX0) 
 
S. No. Name of Experiment 
1 Hall effect with temperature 
2  Electrical Conductivity Measurements using four probe resistivity with 
temperature 
3 Vibrational spectroscopy (Raman) 
4 Phonon Dispersion curve 
5 Band gap measurements 
6 Photoluminescence Spectroscopy studies of Materials 
7 Solar cell characterization 
8 Studies on Thermoelectric properties of materials 
9 Thermoelectric Device Characterization 
10 ESR Spectroscopy 
11 Magnetic Susceptibility Measurements 
12 Study of Thermoluminescence of F-centres in Alkali Halide crystals 
 
Optics & Lasers Laboratory (Course No. PHP6XX0) 
 
S. No. Name of the Experiment 
1. To find the wavelength of monochromatic light 
To determine the spacing between the plates of fabry Perot etalon from the fringe 
Pattern  
To find the finesse and free spectral range (FSR) of etalon from the fringe 
calibration at different cavity thickness 
2. To find the refractive index of an unknown solution. 
3. To study the birefringence with respect to applied voltage in an electro optic liquid 
4. Numerical aperture, splice loss and bending loss measurement of multi-mode fiber 
. Numerical aperture and mode field diameter measurement of single mode fiber . 
Calculation of normalized frequency or V-number of single mode fiber . 
Determination of refractive index of transparent solids 
516 
 
5. To calculate the peak wavelength and spectral bandwidth of LEDs. To analyze 
emission spectrum of laser and study the peak wavelength. 
6. To find out the difference in wavelength of D1 and D2 lines of sodium light. To 
determine the wavelength of monochromatic light 
7. To determine wavelength of laser beam.  
To find refractive index of a transparent material. 
8. To study Gaussian nature of the laser beam. To find diameter (beam spot size) of 
the laser beam. To determine divergence of the laser beam. 
9. Diffraction of light by single slit, double slit, single wire, cross wire and 
transmission grating 
10. Intensity measurement as a function of analyzer angle  
Polarization study by quarter wave plate - elliptical and circular polarization.  
Polarization study by half wave plate - change of polarization axis.  Verification of 
Malus' law 
 
Computational Laboratory (Course No. PHP6XX0) 
 
S. No. Name of Experiment 
1 Implementation of nonlinear root finding techniques 
2  Interpolation techniques 
3 Curve fittings 
4 Solving ordinary differential equations 
5 Simulations of physical systems, Monte Carlo technique etc 
6 Solution of Schrodinger like equation 
7 Solution of Helmohz equation (Propagation study) 
8 Quantum Simulation 
 
  
517 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hands-on Experiments 
  
518 
 
Hands-on Experiments (High end equipments) (PHP6XX0) 
 
S. No. Topic 
1. Amplitude and frequency modulation circuits (Digital Storage Oscilloscope) 
2. Regulated power supplies and their performance evaluation (DSO) 
3. Solar cell construction and characterization (XRD, UV-VIS, SEM, etc.) 
4. Magnetic moment detection (MPMS, PPMS, etc.) 
5. Optoelectronic Properties of Materials (Raman, PPMS) 
6. Construction of coupled prism experimental set up and demonstration of tunneling 
phenomenon 
7. Construction of telescope and observation of stellar objects 
8. Measurement of speed of light using oscillations (DSO , Fast Photodiode) 
9. Life-time of muon (Scintillation detector, Data acquisition and processing system, 
Python coding) 
10. Optical fibre characterization (Laser source, Communication Fibre, Photodetector) 
11. Optical cloaking 
12. Nanomaterials Characterization (XRD, AFM, SEM, PPMS, etc.) 
13. Paschen Curve -Dependence of break-down voltage on the pressure and inter-
electrode gap for a given gas in plasma discharge 
14. Measurement of Plasma parameters by electrostatic probe 
15. Characterization of DC magnetron discharge and estimation of sputtering yield  
16.  Generation and characterization of  non-thermal and non-equilibrium cold plasma 
 
  
519 
 
Hands-on Experiments (Computational Tools) (PHP6XX0) 
 
S. No. Topic 
1. Ray tracing for design of solar concentrator 
2. Use of COSMOL software for macroscopic multiphysics phenomena 
3. Rsoft software for visualization of optical components and devices 
4. Optifibre for visualization of optical communication through optical fibres 
5. Design of optoelectronic materials using DFT 
6. Molecular dynamics simulation using LAMMPS and GROMACS 
7. Simulation of magnetic domains using Micromagnetics 
8. Gamma ray burst (GRB) data analysis from the Fermi-GBM space telescope. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
520 
 
Title General Theory of Relativity Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. give the student a basic understanding of the General Theory of Relativity and its 
importance for modern physics.  
 Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. have detailed insight regarding theory and dynamics related to gravity. 
2. be able to apply the theory of general relativity in many fields of physics for example in 
astrophysics and cosmology. 
 
Contents  
Preliminary discussions:  Review of special theory of relativity, vector and tensor, particle 
dynamics, electrodynamics, energy momentum tensor, relativistic hydrodynamics. 
Principle of equivalence:  Statement of the principle,  gravitational forces, geodesic –affine 
connection, Newtonian limit. (8 Lectures) 
Tensor analysis : Tensor algebra, tensor density, transformation of affine connection, 
covariant differentiation, gradient, divergence, curl, parallel transport. (8 Lectures)  
Curvature: curvature tensor, Bianchi identity, Ricci tensor, curvature scalar, Killing vectors 
and symmetries. (5 Lectures) 
 Einstein's field equation : Deri vation of field equation, Schwarzschild solution, Birkhoff's 
theorem, geodesic equation in Schwarzschild space time, Precession of perihelion of 
mercury, bending of light rays, gravitational red shift. (8 Lectures) 
Stellar equilibrium and collapse : Differe ntial equation for stellar structure, White dwarfs, 
neutron stars, comoving coordinates, Schwarzschild blackholes, collapse to a blackholes.  
Gravitational radiation: (10 Lectures) 
Universe: Friedmann-Robertson-Walker solution, our Universe. (3 Lectures) 
Textbook  
1. Weinberg, S., Gravitation and Cosmology: Principle and Applications of the General Theory 
of Relativity, 1st Ed.,  John Willey & Sons 1972. 
2.  Hartle, J. B., Gravity, 1st Ed. , Pearson education 2011.  
3.  Misner, C.W., Thorne, K. S. and Wheeler, J. A., Gravitation, Princeton University Press 2017 
 
Self Learning Material  
521 
 
1. Schutz, B., General Relativity, Cambridge University Press 2011 
2. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hbmf0bB38h0&list=PLGI_2C39f-
V1AACba_7pZP8A9M7PmQJqx 
3.  Bertschinger, E. W., General Relativity, http://hdl.handle.net/1721.1/36859. 
Preparatory Course Material  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
522 
 
Title Relativistic Quantum Mechanics Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. To obtain an understanding of the key concepts of relativistic quantum mechanics. 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand Klein Gordon and Dirac equations, their significance and transformation 
properties.  
2. Understand various applications of relativistic wave equations.  
Contents  
Klein Gordon Equation: KG equation, The non relativistic limit, Free spin -0 particles, The 
charged KG field, Lagrange density and energy -momentum tensor of the KG -field, Lorentz 
Invariance of the KG equation, Charge conjugation and C Parity, Interaction of a spin -0 particle 
with an electromagnetic field, Gauge invariance of the couplings, Lagrange density and energy -
momentum tensor for a KG particle in an electromagnetic field, So lution of KG equation for a 
square-well, exponential and scalar 1/r potential, Basics of Photonics atoms.  (14 Lectures)  
Dirac Equation: Negative Energy Solutions, Antiparticles, Dirac Hole Theory, Feynman 
interpretation of Antiparticles, Gamma -matrices an d their properties, Lagrange density and 
energy-momentum tensor of the free Dirac equation, Covariance of Dirac equation, Pauli‟s 
fundamental theorem, Spinors under Lorentz transformations, Bilinear covariants, Charge 
conjugation, Parity & Time reversal invariance. (14 Lectures) 
Applications of Dirac Equations:  Majorana representation of Dirac equation, Two component 
theory of neutrino, Spin and Helicity, Dirac particle in one -dimensional square well potential, 
Solution of Dirac equation in a Coulomb and sc alar potential, Relativistic Hydrogen atom 
problem, Klein‟s paradox (14 Lectures) 
Textbook  
1. Bjorken, J.D. and Drell, S.D., Relativistic Quantum Mechanics, McGraw-Hill, New York 1998. 
2.Sakurai,J.J., Advanced Quantum Mechanics, Addison-Wesley, 1967. 
3. Greiner, W., Relativistic Quantum Mechanics, Springer, 2000. 
 
 
 
523 
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Guth, A., Relativistic Quantum Field Theory - I,  http://hdl.handle.net/1721.1/53412 
 
Preparatory Course Material  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
524 
 
Title Particle Physics Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide background to understand the concepts of modern particle physics. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand details of Quantum Electrodynamics, Quantum Chromodynamics and Weak 
interactions. 
2. Grasp concepts of Standard Model of particle physics and its limitations. 
 
Contents  
 
A preview of Particle Physics:  Elementary particle dynamics, Quark structure of Hadrons, 
Decay rates and cross sections (4 Lectures).  
 
Quantum Electrodynamics (QED):  Elementary QED processes, Anomalous magnetic 
moment, Extracting the moment and evaluating t he graphs, Electron self -energy, Pole 
mass, Minimal Subtraction, Counter terms, Two and three point functions, Infrared 
divergences, Jets, Renormalizability of QED. (12 Lectures) 
 
Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD):  Feynman rules for QCD, Elastic and inelastic e lectron-
proton scattering, The Rosenbluth formula, Parton distribution functions, Callan -Gross 
relation, Dokshitzer -Gribov-Lipatov-Altarelli-Parisi (DGLAP) splitting function, Factorization 
and the parton model,  The operator product expansion (14 Lectures) 
 
Weak and Electroweak Interactions:   The weak charged current interactions, V -A and chiral 
structure of weak interaction, Lepton universality, Charged and neutral  current neutrino 
scattering, Electroweak Unification, The Higgs mechanism, Discovery of Hi ggs Boson, Need 
for physics beyond the standard model. (12 Lectures) 
 
 
 
525 
 
Textbook 
1. Schwartz, M. D., Quantum Field Theory and the Standard Model, Cambridge University 
Press, 2014. 
2. Thomson, M., Modern Particle Physics, Cambridge University Press, 2016. 
 
 
Self Learning Material  
1.  Susskind, L., New Revolutions in Particle Physics: Basic Concepts, 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2eFvVzNF24g&list=PL768E1383EA79C603  
     
Preparatory Course Material  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
526 
 
Title Quantum Field Theory Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide background to understand basic concepts of quantization of scalar, spinor and 
gauge fields. 
 
 Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand interrelations between quantum fields, symmetry and conservation laws.  
2. Apply the techniques of Feynman rules and diagrams to various elementary scattering pro  
 
Contents  
Classical field theory: Lagrangian and Hamiltonian formalisms; Occupation number 
representation, Noether's theorem, Continuous and discrete symmetries (4 lectures). 
 
Canonical Quantization: General Formulation, Normal ordering, Mode expansion, Quantization 
of real and complex scalar fields, Commutation relations, Quantization of Dirac fields, Anti -
Commutators, Quantization of massless gauge fields in radia tion and Lorentz gauge, 
Quantization of massive vector fields (14 lectures).   
 
Interacting field theory:  Propagators and Green‟s functions, The S -matrix, Perturbation 
expansion of the S -matrix, Wick's Theorem, Feynman Rules and Feynman diagrams for 
interacting scalar field theory and spinor electrodynamics, Lowest Order Cross -Section for 
Rutherford and Mott scattering (16 lectures).  
 
Radiative Corrections and Renormalization: Casimir effect, Vacuum polarization, Electron 
magnetic moment, Lamb‟s shift, Mass renormalization (8 lectures) 
Textbook  
1. Peskin, M. E. and Schroeder, D. V., An Introduction to Quantum Field Theory , Frontiers in 
Physics, 1995.  
2. Weinberg, S., The Quantum Theory of Fields I, Cambridge University Press, 2008.  
527 
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Tripathy, P. K., Quantum Field Theory, IIT Madras,  https://nptel.ac.in/courses/115106065/ 
2. Tong D., Lectures on Quantum Field Theory, University of Cambridge , 
http://www.damtp.cam.ac.uk/user/tong/qft.html  
    
Preparatory Course Material  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
528 
 
Title  Photonics Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Pre-requisite  To effect from  
 
Objective  
To understand the fundamental aspects of light wave, its propagation and interaction with the 
medium 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. The students will become familiar with the interesting concepts of photonics and principles of 
polarizers, modulators, waveguides, resonators, lasers and holograms etc. 
2. The course will provide a roadmap to develop specialized knowledge in the field of photonics  
 
Course Content 
 
Wave propagation in dielectric - group velocity  and dispersion, pulse spreading, plane wave and 
Helmholtz equation, Gaussian and Bessel beams 
Polarization states and representation - Jones vector, Stokes parameters for polarized and 
unpolarized light, Poincare sphere, Coherence- linewidth, spatial coherence, interferometers 
Light propagation in anisotropic media - electro-optic modulation, acousto -optic interaction, 
modulators 
Fourier optics- free space light propagation, optical Fourier transform, concept of image formation 
and holography, introduction to diffraction    
Photonic crystals and waveguides - periodic media and Bloch waves, concept of photonic bandgap, 
1D, 2D and 3D crystals, dispersion relation, wave-guidance, applications 
Optical Resonators- mode and mode density, losses and spectral width, qualit y factor, Fabry-Perot 
etalon, optical spectrum analyzers, mode stability, ring resonators, micro-resonators  
Lasers- light amplification, threshold condition, rate equation, three and four level laser systems, 
transverse and longitudinal mode selection, Q-switching, mode-locking, Applications of lasers   
Nonlinear Optics- physical origin of nonlinear polarization, second order nonlinear phenomena,Kerr 
effect, stimulated Raman scattering, stimulated Brillouin scattering, four-wave mixing  
 
 Textbooks 
1. Yariv, A., and Yeh, P., Photonics, Oxford University Press, 2007. 
2. Saleh, B. E. A., and Teich, M. C., Fundamentals of Photonics, John Wiley & Sons, 2007.  
529 
 
 Reference Books 
    Ghatak, A. K., and Thyagarajan, K., Optical Electronics, Cambridge University Press, 2002. 
Online Course Material 
   Srinivasan, B., Introduction to Photonics, 
https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc19_ee20/preview 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
530 
 
Title Astrophysics Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Familiarize the basic ideas needed to understand astrophysical phenomena.  
2. Elucidate the nature and properties of compact astrophysical objects. 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. have idea how astrophysical observations, measurements can be carried out and how the 
observational data can be interpreted. 
2. be acquainted with the physics of compact objects. 
 
Contents  
Properties of Sun:  Estimate of surface temperature, luminosity, radiu s, mass, sun's 
spectrum, composition of sun.  (2 Lectures) 
Fundamental of radiative transfer:  Radiative flux, the specific intensity, radiative transfer, 
optical depth, plane parallel atmosphere, the grey atmosphere problem, formation of 
spectral line, opacity, calculation of opacity.  (8 Lectures) 
Properties of stars:  Colour and surface temperature, stellar spectra, spectroscopy parallax. 
the Hertzsprung-Russel diagram, size, mass and temperature of stars.  (6 Lectures) 
Stellar formation and evolution: Hydrostatic equilibrium, virial theorem, Jeans' crieria for star 
formation, brown dwarf, stellar structure equations.  (7 Lectures) 
Nucleosynthesis inside stars:  Possibility of nuclear reactions in stars, Nuclear reaction rates, 
important nuclear reactions in stars, evolution of stars with different masses.  (4 Lectures) 
White dwarfs: - equation of state for degenerate gas, polytropic EoS, Lane -Emden equation, 
Chandrasekhar mass limit. (6 Lectures) 
Neutron stars : Supernova, neutron star, neutron drip, TOV equa tion, pulsars, magnetic 
dipole model of pulsars, nonvacuum pulsar model, glitch, cooling of neutron stars, neutron 
stars in binary. (6 Lectures) 
Galaxies: Stellar dynamics, Interstellar medium. (3 Lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Rai Choudhari A., Astrophysics for physicists, 1st Ed., Cambridge University Press 2010. 
2. Morison I., Introduction to astronomy and cosmology, 1st Ed., Willey and Sons ltd 2008. 
3. Shapiro, S. L., Teukolsky, S. A., Black Holes, White Dwarfs, and Neutron Stars , 1st ed., 
WILLEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, 2004.  
531 
 
Self Learning Material  
1. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dpRqK_awV9Y&list=PLy5Ast_vPItFNkraErbQ8AmWEaQ
Mt34Rx 
2. https://www.edx.org/course/introduction-astrophysics-epflx-phys-209-enx 
3. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nzmFc2gjUo4&list=PLE17CC91B39224675 
Preparatory Course Material  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
532 
 
Title Physics of neutrinos Number PHL8XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Prerequisite Particle Physics   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide background to understand the role of neutrinos in probing fundamental 
interactions of nature. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Grasp the theoretical concepts of neutrino oscillations and various neutrino mass models.  
2. Understand details of various currently running and upcoming experimental facilities. 
3.  Understand the role of neutrinos in the early universe.  
 
Contents  
 
Neutrino oscillations: Solar and atmospheric neutrino puzzles, Neutrino oscillations in vacuum, 
plane wave & wave packet treatment, Neutrino oscillations in c onstant matter density, MSW 
resonance, Neutrinos through varying matter density, Terrestrial neutrino oscillation 
experiments, Supernova neutrinos. Synchronized & Bipolar oscillations, Spectral split.   (10 
Lectures) 
 
Sterile Neutrinos: LSND anomaly, More neutrino species, MiniBoone experiment, New 
anomalies - Reactor neutrino anomaly and Gallium experiments calibration anomaly, Proposed 
future experiments, Sterile neutrinos in astrophysics and cosmology.  (10 Lectures) 
 
Neutrino Nature and Mass:  Absolute m ass experiments , Dirac and Majorana masses for 
neutrinos, Neutrinoless double beta decay, Neutrino mass models, Seesaw mechanism, Type I, 
II and III Seesaw models, Zee model, Left -right symmetric model, GUT -based models, 
Supersymmetric models.  (10 Lectures) 
 
Neutrino Cosmology: Robertson–Walker metric, Dynamics of expansion, The cosmic neutrino 
background, Neutrino temperature, Energy density of light massive neutrinos, Energy density 
of heavy neutrinos, Neutrinos as dark matter.  (8 Lectures) 
533 
 
 
Ultra-high energy Neutrinos : Neutrinos from Astrophysical objects: AGNs, GRBs, GZK 
neutrinos, Neutrino Astronomy.  (4 Lectures) 
 
Textbook 
1.Giunti, C., & Kim, C. W., Fundamentals of Neutrino Physics and Astrophysics , Oxford 
University Press 2007. 
2. Kim, C. W., &  Pevsner, A., Neutrinos in physics and astrophysics , Harwood Academic 
1993. 
 
Reference Books  
1. Fukugita, M., & Yanagida, T., Physics of Neutrinos, Springer Verlag 2003. 
2.Boehm,‎ F., & Vogel, P., Physics of Massive Neutrinos, Cambridge University Press 1992. 
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Dighe, A., Neutrino Physics,  Tata Institute of Fundamental Research Mumbai, 
https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL28B95E11276C75F6 
Preparatory Course Material  
 
 
 
 
 
  
534 
 
 
Title Gauge theory of weak interactions Number PHL8XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Prerequisite Particle Physics   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide background to understand basic concepts of non -abelian global and local gauge 
symmetries. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Grasp the theoretical concepts of spontaneously broken symmetry, both global and local.  
2. Understand details of Glashow -Salam-Weinberg gauge theory of electroweak 
interactions. 
 
Contents  
Global non -Ablelian symmetries:  Flavor symmetries        and       , Non -Abelian global 
symmetries in Lagrangian quantum field theories, chiral symmetry. (4 Lectures) 
  
 Local  non-Ablelian symmetries:  Local SU(2) symmetry: the covariant derivative, Geometrical 
curvature and the gauge field strength tensor, Local SU(3) symmetry, Local SU(2) and SU(3) 
Lagrangians, Quantizing non -Abelian gauge fields: Interaction of non -Abelian gauge bosons, 
The Faddeev -Popov Lagrangian, Ghosts and Unitarity, Becchi -Rouet-Stora-Tyutin (BRST) 
symmetry, One loop divergences of non-Abelian gauge theory,   function.  (8 Lectures) 
 
Spontaneous symmetry breaking: The Fabri-Picasso theorem, Spontaneously broken symmetry 
in cond ensed matter physics: The ferromagnet and The Bogoliubov superfluid, Goldstone‟s 
theorem, Spontaneously broken global U(1) symmetry: the Goldstone model, Spontaneously 
broken global non -Abelian symmetry, Chiral Symmetry Breaking: The Nambu analogy, Two 
flavour QCD and         X        ,  Pion decay and the Goldberger -Treiman relation, The linear 
and nonliear σ -models, Chiral anomalies; Massive and massless vector particles, The 
generation of „photon mass‟ in a superconductor, Spontaneously broken l ocal U(1) symmetry: 
the Abelian Higgs model, ‟t Hooft‟s gauges, Spontaneously broken local SU(2) X U(1) 
symmetry. (15 Lectures) 
 
Electroweak Unification: Violation of unitarity in the current –current model, The Intermediate 
vector Boson (IVB) model, Violat ion of unitarity bounds in the IVB model, The problem of non -
535 
 
renormalizability in weak interactions, Glashow -Salam-Weinberg theory of Electroweak 
Interactions: Weak isospin and hypercharge, The SU(2) X U(1) group of the electroweak 
interactions, quantum nu mber assignments and W and Z masses, The leptonic currents and 
massless neutrinos, The quark currents, simple tree -level predictions, Anomaly cancellations, 
The discovery of the    and    at the CERN     collider, The fermion mass problem, Quark  and 
neutrino flavour mixing, Higher -order corrections, The top quark, The Higgs sector, Theoretical 
considerations concerning Higgs mass, Higgs phenomenology, Discovery of Higgs Bosons. (15 
Lectures) 
Textbook 
1. Aitchison, I. J. R. & Hey, A. J. G., Gauge Theories in Particle Physics, Volume II: A Practical 
Introduction : Non-Abelian Gauge Theories : QCD and the Electoweak Theory, Taylor & 
Francis, 2003.  
2. Cheng, T. P. & Li, L. F., Gauge theory of elementary particle physics, Oxford University 
Press, 2000. 
Self Learning Material  
1. Langacker, P., The Standard Model, Institute of Advanced Study Princeton, 
https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLNhSjK9aGXjq22HAdhjMdJM3Ig4KdLayP 
Preparatory Course Material  
1. Peskin, M. E. & Schroeder, D. V., An Introduction to Quantum Field Theory, Addison-Wesley 
Pub. Co, 1995. 
 
 
  
536 
 
 
Title Dark Energy Number PHL8XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Prerequisite General Theory of Relativity   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide background to understand concepts related to Dark Energy which is thought to 
comprise 68% of the known universe. 
2.  Provide background to develop insight of theoretical models of Dark Energy. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Grasp concepts of various matter and gravity modified models of Dark Energy. 
2. Understand details of a number of experimental methods to probe Dark Energy.  
 
Contents  
 
Theoretical Framework:  Friedmann equations, equation of state of dark energy, Correlation 
function and power spectrum, Cosmological perturbation theory, The Newton ian gauge, Single-
fluid model, Scales larger than the horizon, Scales smaller than the Hubble radius, Two -fluid 
solutions, The matter power spectrum, Perturbed photon propagation. (10 Lectures) 
  
Cosmological Constant: The fine tuning problem, The coincide nce problem, Supersymmetric 
models, Cosmological constant and the anthropic principle, The decoupling of the cosmological 
constant from gravity. (4 Lectures) 
 
Modified Matter Models of Dark Energy:  Quintessence, Quintessence potentials in particle 
physics, Reconstruction of quintessence from observations, k -essence, Phantoms, Coupled dark 
energy, Chameleon scalar fields, Dark energy models with scaling solutions, Unified models of 
dark energy and dark matter. (8 Lectures) 
 
Modified gravity Models of Dark Energy: f (R) gravity, Gauss –Bonnet dark energy models, 
Scalar-tensor theories, Dvali, Gabadadze and Porrati (DGP) braneworld model. (4 Lectures) 
537 
 
 
Cosmic Acceleration without Dark Energy: Lemaître–Tolman–Bondi (LTB)  models, Backreaction 
of Cosmological Perturbations. (4 Lectures) 
 
Observational Methods: Type Ia Supernovae as Dark Energy Probe, Baryon Acoustic Oscillations 
(BAO) as Standard Ruler, The Alcock –Paczynski Test, Weak Gravitational Lensing, Weak 
Lensing Observation al Results, Cluster Abundance as a Dark Energy Probe, X -Ray Gas Mass 
Fraction as a Dark Energy Probe, Gamma Ray Bursts and Radio Galaxies as Cosmological Probe.  
(12 Lectures) 
 
Textbook 
1.Amendola, L. &  Tsujikawa, S., (2010), Dark Energy: Theory and Observations, 
Cambridge University Press. 
2. Wang, Y., (2010),  Dark Energy, Wiley-VCH. 
3.  Dodelson, (2000), Modern Cosmology, Elsevier. 
 
Self Learning Material  
1.Turner, M., The Dark Side of the Universe: Dark Matter and Dark Energy,  Department of 
Astronomy and Astrophysics, University of Chicago,  
http://videolectures.net/cernacademictraining2010_turner_dark/ 
 
 
 
  
538 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 yr M.Sc. Chemistry  
 
Curriculum Structure 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
539 
 
 
Introduction to the Program 
Chemistry involves the study of substances, their properties, structures, reactions and 
transformations. Chemistry is interlinked with various scientific disciplines and play an 
important role in our daily life. It broadly covers various areas including me dicinal 
chemistry, analytical chemistry, organometallic chemistry, polymer chemistry, quantum 
chemistry, catalysis and many aspects of materials science. In the modern society, 
knowledge of Chemistry is essential for addressing most of the real -life challenges related 
to water, energy, food, agriculture, security and healthcare.   
      
Objectives of the Program 
The major objective of the program is to bring out professionals having fundamental 
knowledge, and specific skill sets of various aspects of chemistry such as Organic 
Reactions and their Mechanism, Main -Group and Transition Metals, Organometallics and 
Catalysis, Physical and Spectroscopic techniques, Inorganic and Solid State Material 
synthesis, Computational and Theoretical Chemistry.  
The department focuses on preparing future students to take up challenges at various 
levels of academics, R&Ds and industries. 
      
Expected Graduate Attributes 
(1) Capability to appreciate synthetic methods for development of important chemical 
products such as pharmaceutical drugs, paints, petrochemicals, food additives, plastics 
etc.  
(2) Ability to use characterization tools for analysing reactions and monitoring chemical 
processes for product development.  
(3) Ability to handle analytical, spectroscopic, microscopic and other instrumental 
methods for interdisciplinary research areas. 
(4) Use of computational tools to understand and analyse chemical and biophysical 
processes, molecular structures and advanced materials. 
(5) Ability to comprehend, write and present scientific articles and technical reports. 
(6) Develop oral and written communication skills. 
(7) Appreciation and adherence to norms of professional ethics and sense of intellectual 
integrity.  
(8) Ability to plan and manage technical research projects and work in a team.  
      
Program Learning outcome 
 
(1) Strong fundamentals in theoretical and practical aspects of organic, inorganic and 
physical chemistry.  
(2) Develop appreciation of hands -on wet chemistry, analytical, instrumentation, and 
experimental data handling skills to solve scientific problems to add ress technological 
challenges in various domains.  
(3) Knowledge of computational and theoretical chemistry. 
(4) Skills for material synthesis and processes for device integration 
(5) Develop the ability to exercise independent learning, thinking and problem sol ving 
skills. 
(6) Develop the ability to interact in a cross-cultural environment and acquire time and 
project management skills for carrying out guided research work in any of the research 
area related to science and technology.  
(7) Develop skills to communicate scientific learning and present ideas. 
      
      
540 
 
Course Curriculum Structure 
 
Cat.  
Course Number, 
Course Title  
L-T-P-D  Credit
s  
 Cat.  Course Number, 
Course Title  
L-T-P-
D  
Credit
s  
I Semester   II Semester  
MC  CYL6XX0 Organic 
Reactions and 
Mechanisms  
3-0-0-0  3   MC  CYL6XX0 Organic 
Synthesis 
3-0-0-
0  
3  
MC  CYL6XX0Transition 
Metal and 
Organometallic 
Chemistry  
3-0-0-0  3   MC  CYL6XX0 Solid State 
and Material Chemistry  
3-0-0-
0  
3  
MC  CYL6XX0 Quantum 
Chemistry and 
Spectroscopy  
3-0-0-0  3   MC  CYL6XX0 
Molecular  Thermodyn
amics and   Chemical 
Kinetics  
3-0-0-
0  
3  
MC  CYL6XX0 Physical 
Organic Chemistry  
3-0-0-0  3   MC  CYL6XX0 Theory and 
Applications of 
spectroscopic 
techniques  
3-0-0-
0  
3  
 
MC  CYL6XX0 Main Group 
and Bioinorganic 
Chemistry 
3-0-0-0  3   ME   Program elective-1  3-0-0-
0  
3  
MC  CYP6XX0 Organic 
Laboratory  
0-0-3-0  1.5   MC   CYP6XX0 Physical   
Laboratory  
0-0-3-
0  
1.5  
MC  CYP6XX0 Inorganic 
Chemistry Laboratory  
0-0-3-0  1.5   MC   CYD6XX0 Minor 
Project  
 0-0-3-
0  
 1.5  
MC  CYP6XX0 Hands on -1  0-0-3-0  1.5   MC   CYP6XX0  Hands on-
2 
0-0-3-
0  
 
1.5  
 
Total  19.5   Total  19.5  
      
III Semester   IV Semester  
MO  Open elective-1  3-0-0-0  3   ME  Program Elective-5  3-0-0-0  3  
ME  Program Elective-2  3-0-0-0  3   ME  Program Elective-6  3-0-0-0  3  
ME  Program Elective-3  0-0-3-0  3   MO Open Elective -2  3-0-0-0  3  
ME  Program Elective-4  3-0-0-0  3   MP  CYD7XX0:Project  0-0-0-
10  
10  
MC  CYP6XX0:Computatio
nal Lab  
0-0-1-0  1.5            
MP  CYD7XX0 Project  0-0-0-5  5            
MC CYQ6XX0 Seminar  0-0-1-0  0.5            
Total  19   Total  19  
* Open Elective Courses can be taken in the third semester as well 
      
Total Credits: 77 
      
      
 
 
541 
 
 
Topic Clouds for MSc Chemistry Curriculum 
A. PHYSICAL CHEMISTRY 
       Topics  Sub-Topic Clouds  
Quantum 
Chemistry  
Principles, Exactly solved problems, Approximation 
Methods, Electronic Structure Methods, Group Theory. 
Chemical Kinetics 
and 
Thermodynamics  
Molecular Thermodynamics, Chemical Kinetics, Catalysis, 
Chemical Reaction Dynamics, Reaction Kinetics of special 
reactions.  
Spectroscopy  Fundamentals of Spectroscopic techniques and associated 
applications, Principles of NMR, Analytical Methods.  
Electrochemistry  Basics of Electrochemistry, DC and AC techniques, 
Photoelectrochemistry, Redox Reactions, Semiconductor 
Solution interfaces, Electrochemical Sensors, Electro-
transfer systems, Solar cells, Electrochemical Energy 
Storage Devices, Fuel cell.  
 Statistical 
Mechanics  
Molecular simulation, Polymer dynamics, Statistical 
mechanics, Stochastic problems in biophysics.  
Hands on and 
Experimental 
Laboratory  
Analytical Methods: UV-Vis, Fluorescence, FTIR etc. 
Electroanalytical methods (CV, EIS, GCD, 
Chronopotentiometry, Ampereometric and steady state 
techniques), Surface and Interface Chemistry: contact 
angle, surface tension, surface free energy, 
conductometric titrations.  
 
B. ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
Topics  Sub-Topic Clouds  
Organic Synthesis and 
Catalysis  
Organic Reactions Mechanism and 
Rearrangements, Organic methods, Pericyclic 
reactions, Organic Photochemistry, Spectroscopy of 
Organic Compounds, Enolate chemistry, Radical 
Chemistry, catalysis in organic chemistry, 
Microwave Reactions, Heterocyclic Chemistry, 
Green Chemistry.  
Asymmetric Synthesis  Basics of Stereochemistry, Stereochemistry of 
Organic Compounds, Enantioselective Synthesis, 
Transition State Models and Reaction Outcome.  
542 
 
Medicinal Chemistry and 
Drug Discovery  
Fundamentals of Medicinal Chemistry, PK and PD, 
ADME-TOX, Lipinski‟s Rule, Basics of Drug 
Discovery, Heterocyclic compounds as leads, 
clinical trials  
Natural Products Retrosynthetic Analysis, Natural Product Isolation, 
Total Synthesis of Natural Products 
Laboratory and Hand-
on 
Synthesis Protocols, Purification and Distillation 
Techniques,  Chromatography Structural 
Determination of Organic compounds  
 
C. INORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
Topic Cloud  Sub-Topic Clouds  
Transition Metal, 
Coordination 
chemistry, and 
Organometallics  
General consideration of d block elements, 
Coordination complexes: Structure, Bonding and 
Properties, Reaction Mechanism. Molecular Complexes, 
Coordination polymers and their properties. 
Organometallic complexes: synthesis, reactivity and 
catalytic applications. 
Solid -State Materials 
Chemistry  
Crystal Structures, X-Ray Diffraction Techniques, 
Synthesis and Physical Characterization of Materials, 
Bonding in Solids and properties,  Compound 
semiconductors, molecular magnets and magnetic 
properties, Defects and Non-stoichiometry, 
Nanomaterials with low-dimensional properties.  
Main Group Chemistry 
and Bioinorganic 
Chemistry  
Basic Concept: Periodic Trends, Atoms, Molecules. 
Structure, Bonding and Reactivity of polyatomic 
molecules. Synthesis and properties of compounds of 
s- and p-block elements. 
Metal ions in biological systems and Medicine, Iron 
storage and Transport, Oxygen transport, Biological 
Redox processes, Metallo-Enzymes.  
Catalysis  Catalysis: Introductory Concept, Homogeneous and 
Heterogeneous Catalysis: Industrially important 
reactions, catalytic concept of energy and 
environmental  
Environmental 
Chemistry  
Environmental Remediation, Soil Chemistry, Water 
Chemistry, Chemical Sensors, Analytical Chemistry  
Laboratory and Hands-
on  
Synthesis Techniques for complexes and solids, 
Characterization methods, spectroscopic and analytical 
techniques  
 
 
543 
 
 
Contents 
 
 Index 
1 Organic Chemistry Core Courses and Laboratory 
1. Organic Reactions and Mechanism 
2. Physical organic Chemistry 
3. Organic Synthesis 
4. Organic Chemistry Laboratory 
2 Organic Chemistry Elective Courses 
1. Isolation and Synthesis of Natural Products 
2. Spectroscopic Determination of Organic Compounds 
3. Stereochemistry of Organic Compounds 
4. Frontiers in Organic Chemistry 
5. Heterocyclic Chemistry 
6. Polymer Chemistry 
3 Inorganic Chemistry Core Courses and Laboratory 
1. Main Group and Bioinorganic Chemistry 
2. Transition Metal and Organometallic Chemistry 
3. Solid State and Material Chemistry 
4. Inorganic Chemistry Laboratory 
4 Inorganic Chemistry Elective Courses 
1. Catalysis of Energy 
2. Nanomaterials and Nanodevices 
3. Compounds of p-block Elements and Applications 
4. Advanced Materials Design 
5. Characterization Techniques in Inorganic Chemistry 
6. Advanced Catalysis 
7. Water Chemistry 
8. Sustainable Catalytic Systems 
9. Frontiers in Organometallic Catalysis 
5 Physical Chemistry Core Courses and Laboratory 
1. Quantum Chemistry and Spectroscopy 
2. Molecular Thermodynamics and Chemical Kinetics 
3. Theory and Applications of Spectroscopic Techniques 
4. Physical Chemistry Laboratory 
5. Computational Chemistry Laboratory 
6 Physical Chemistry Elective Courses 
1. Numerical Methods and Group Theory 
2. Chemical Binding 
3. Principles of Nuclear Magnetic Resonance 
4. Molecular Dynamics Simulations 
5. Solid State NMR Methods for Materials 
6. Group Theory and Molecular Spectroscopy 
7. Modern Electronic Structure Theory 
8. Chemical Reaction Dynamics 
9. Biophysical Techniques: Theory and Applications 
10.Stochastic problems in Biophysics 
11.Polymer Dynamics 
12.Statistical Mechanics and Molecular Simulations 
13.Advanced Electrochemistry and Applications  
7 Hands on-1 
Hands on-2 
 
544 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
Organic Chemistry 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
545 
 
 
    
Title Organic Reactions and Mechanisms  Number CYL6XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
      
Objectives  
The instructor will: 
1. To give students a better insight into the mechanism of diverse set of organic reactions 
2. To broaden their knowledge in fundamental organic chemistry with regard to efficiency 
and selectivity of organic reactions. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. The students are expected to be able to draw mechanisms for complex reactions 
2. Understand and predict the orbital interactions involved in organic reactions  
      
Contents  
Introduction: reaction mechanism and its need, methods of determination of reaction 
mechanism, concerted versus stepwise processes, transition states and intermediates, 
early and late transition states, crossover experiments and examples, molecular orbital 
interaction of common functional groups (7 lectures) 
Acids and bases: the pKa scale and its interpretation, pKa‟s of common acids; specific and 
general acid and base catalysis (3 lectures) 
Classification of reactions: introduction to substitution, elimination and addition reactions, 
aromaticity and aromatic substitution reactions (9 lectures) 
Stereochemistry: basics of Stereochemistry, stereochemistry of aliphatic compounds, 
conformational analysis of acyclic and cyclic compounds, (6 lectures)  
Selectivity: chemoselectivity, regioselctivity, and stereoselectivity (4 lectures) 
Radical Chemistry : Basics of radicals, radical initiators, radical halogenation of alkanes, 
radical name reactions (6 lectures) 
Rearrangements and migrations: cationic rearrangements, carbanionic rearrangements, 
carbene/carbenoid based rearrangements (7 lectures) 
      
Textbooks  
1. Sykes,P., (2013), A Guidebook to Mechanism in Organic Chemistry, 6th Edition, 
Longman 
2. Clayden,J., Greeves,N., and Warren,S., (2012), Organic Chemistry, 2nd Edition, Oxford 
3. Carey,F.A., and Sundberg,R.J., (2007) Advanced Organic Chemistry, Part A: Structure 
and Mechanisms, 4th Edition, Plenum 
 
Reference Books  
1. Gossman,R.B., (2008), The Art of Writing Reasonable Organic Reaction Mechanism, 
Springer 
 
Self Learning Material  
1.Sunoj,R.B., Organic Reaction Mechanism, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104101005/  
 
 
 
 
 
546 
 
 
 
Title Physical Organic Chemistry Number  CYL6XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite     
 
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. To provide physical concepts of organic chemistry  
2. To provide knowledge in pericyclic and photochemical reactions  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Be able to understand the course of organic reactions with regard to physical concepts 
and stereochemical models 
2. Develop an in-depth knowledge with mechanistic understanding in pericyclic and 
photochemical reactions and apply those in the synthesis of organic compounds 
 
Contents 
Introduction: Brief review of basic concepts of inductive effect, Electromeric effect, 
Resonance effect, Hyperconjugation, Captodative Effect (4 lectures) 
Stereoelectronic Effects: Participation of sigma and pi bonds in transition state, Orbital 
symmetry and frontier orbitals, , Hammond‟s Postulate, Hammette Plot, Curtin–Hammett 
principle (6 lectures) 
Stereochemical Models: Cram Model, Felkin-Anh Model, Chelation Model, Zimmerman-
Traxler Model (7 lectures) 
Pericyclic Reactions: Introduction of pericyclic reactions, Classifications, Cycloaddition, 
Electrocyclic, Sigmatropic, Group transfer reactions (15 lectures) 
Photochemistry: Basic principles of photochemistry, Photochemical reaction of cyclic and 
acyclic carbonyl compounds including enones and dienones, photochemistry of alkenes, 
dienes, aromatic compounds (10 lectures) 
 
Textbooks  
1. Anslyn, E. V. and Dougherty, D. A., (2006),Modern Physical Organic Chemistry, 
University Science Books 
2. Singh, J. and Singh, J., (2012), Photochemistry and Pericyclic Reactions, 3rd Edition. 
New Age  
 
Reference Books 
1. Smith, M. B., (2016), March‟s Advanced Organic Chemistry, 7th Edition. Wiley  
2. Carey, F. A. and Sundberg, R. J., (2007), Advanced Organic Chemistry Part A: 
Structure and Mechanisms, 5th Edition. Springer 
3. Carey, F. A. and Sundberg, R. J. (2007), Advanced Organic Chemistry Part B: Reactions 
and Synthesis, 5th Edition. Springer 
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Singh, N.D. P., Organic Chemistry and Pericyclic Reactions, NPTEL Course material, 
Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, 
http://www.nptel.ac.in/courses/ 104105071/ 
 
 
 
547 
 
 
 
Title Organic Synthesis Number CYL6XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The instructor will: 
1. To provide an understanding of diverse chemical reactions and their application in 
synthesis 
2. To provide knowledge of key aspects of retrosynthesis of simple-to-complex organic 
molecules. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
1. Acquire the knowledge and skills required to strategize and plan organic synthesis,   
2. Develop an understanding of total synthesis of organic molecules.  
 
Contents  
Introduction: name reactions, functional group interconversions, transition metal 
catalyzed cross-coupling reactions, oxidations and reductions in organic synthesis (25 
lectures)  
Carbon-carbon bond formation: application of carbanions in organic synthesis, alkylation 
of enolates, enamines and hydrazones, alkylation of heteroatom stabilized anions, 
organometallic reagents and their application in synthesis (7 lectures) 
Strategy and design of organic synthesis: scope and brief history of organic synthesis, 
synthetic strategy, concepts of synthetic equivalents and Umpolung, retrosynthetic 
analysis, linear and convergent synthesis, synthesis of 3-membered, 4-membered, 5 
membered and 6-membered ring compounds (10 lectures) 
 
Text books  
1. Warren,S., and Wyatt.P., (2008), Organic Synthesis: The Disconnection Approach, 2nd 
Edition, Wiley-VCH 
2.  Nicolaou,K.C., Sorensen,E.J., (1996), Classics in Total Synthesis: Targets, Strategies 
and Methods, 1st Edition, Wiley-VCH 
3.  Carey,F.A., Sundberg,R.J., (2007), Advanced Organic Chemistry, Part B: Reactions and 
Synthesis, 5th Edition, Plenum 
 
Reference Books  
1. Clayden,J., Greeves,N., and Warren,S., (2012) Organic Chemistry, 2nd Ed., Oxford 
2. Carruthers, W., (1989), Some Modern Methods in Organic Synthesis, Cambridge  
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Punniyamurthy,T., Principles of Organic Synthesis, NPTEL Course Material, Department 
of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati,  
http://www.nptel.ac.in/courses/104103022/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
548 
 
 
            
 Title 
Organic Chemistry Laboratory Number CYP6XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 0–0–3[1.5] 
Offered for  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The instructor will: 
1. Give students a practical understanding of the theoretical phenomenons. 
2. Provide an exposure to the laboratory techniques for the purification and isolation of organic 
compounds 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
1. Learn basic experimental techniques in organic chemistry 
2. Be able to carry out simple synthetic organic transformations and isolate the reaction 
products  
 
Contents  
Extraction: separation of an acidic, a basic and a neutral substance 
Thin Layer Chromatography (TLC): extraction and TLC of spinach pigments  
Hands on Reactions and Purifications by Column Chromatography: Wittig olefination, Henry 
reaction (Nitro-Aldol reaction), Grignard reaction etc. 
Distillation: Separation of compounds based on boiling point 
Elimination Reaction: Dehydration of methylcyclohexanols to methylcyclohexene 
Cycloaddition: The Diels-Alder reaction of a conjugated diene either in eucalyptus oil or other 
dienophiles 
Aromatic Substitution: The Friedel-Crafts acylation of ferrocene 
Functional Group Interconversion: Reduction and oxidation of organic compounds 
Drug Synthesis: Synthesis of Aspirin from Salicylic Acid 
Green Chemistry: A Solvent-Free Aldol Condensation  
 
Textbook  
1. Vogel, A. I., Textbook of Practical Organic Chemistry, Pearson 
 
Reference Books  
1. Ault, A., Techniques and Experiments for Organic Chemistry, University Science Books 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
549 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electives in Organic 
Chemistry 
 
 
 
 
       
 
  
550 
 
 
Title Isolation and Synthesis of Natural Products Number CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. Give students a brief history of natural products, their isolation and synthetic studies.  
2. Students will learn about multiple synthetic approaches to natural products including 
synthetic drugs. 
3. Students should understand the complete process of total synthesis of natural products and 
effort required to this end. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Understand advanced retrosynthetic principles (e.g. key disconnection, chiral pool starting 
materials, reactive functional group) and apply in the synthesis including stereochemical 
aspects  
2. Understand key principles behind enantio- and diastereoselectivity, and develop skills to 
predict and interpret stereochemical outcome of reactions. 
3. Learn method development and their application in the total synthesis of natural products in 
an economical way. 
 
Contents 
Introduction: Types of natural products - classification - terpenoids, steroids, alkaloids, natural 
pigments, carbohydrates etc. (3 lectures) 
Isolation: Isolation technique with examples and preliminary identification of natural products. 
(2 lectures) 
Retrosynthesis and synthetic routes: Logical retrosynthetic disconnection, method 
developments and applications in the total synthesis of natural products. (8 lectures) 
Recapitulation of stereochemical concepts: stereoselective and stereospecific reactions, 
prochirality, Chemo-, regio-, diastereo- and enantio-controlled approaches; chirality transfer, 
asymmetric inductions; chiral pools, chiral auxiliaries, chiral catalysts. (6 lectures) 
Terpenoids : Classification, structure, chemistry and biogenesis; Steroids : Sterols and bile 
acids, estrogens, androgens, gestogens and adrenocortical hormones; Alkaloids (5 lectures) 
Characteristic reactions, general methods of degradation, structure and chemistry of some 
well-known alkaloids; Natural Pigments: Flavones, flavanones, isoflavones, xanthones, 
quinones, pterins, chlorophyll and haemin; and Carbohydrates. (8 lectures) 
Synthesis of biologically active Natural products: Strychnine (Overmann Syn.), Fredrikamycin 
A(Norman and Coxan), Cephalosporin (Woodward), Estrone, Mifepristone (Vollard), Taxol, 
Tubulysin, Epothilone, Structure determination of Natural products: Arteannuin B, Hardwickiic 
acid, and Ajmaline, stereoselective synthesis of Ibuprofen, crixivan, propranol. (10 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1.Ernest L. Eliel., (1982), Asymmetric Reactions and Processes in Chemistry 
2.Iwao Ojima., (1993), Catalytic Asymmetric Synthesis: 2nd Ed. 
3.J. Clayden, N. Greeves, S. Warren and P. Wothers., (2012), Organic Chemistry 
Reference Books  
1. S. W. Pelletier., (1970), Chemistry of the Alkaloids 
2. C. W.Shoppee., (1964), Chemistry of the Steroids, 2nd edition 
3.K. Nakanishi, T. Goto, S.Ito, S. Najori and S. Nozoe., (1974), Natural products Chemistry, 
Vol. 1 and 2, Academic Press 
Self Learning Material  
1.http://www.wou.edu/chemistry/courses/online-chemistry-textbooks/ch105-consumer-
chemistry/ch105-chapter-6-hydrocarbons/ 
 
  
551 
 
 
Title Spectroscopic Determination of 
Organic Compounds 
Course No. CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry Structure (L-T-P-C) 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Sc./PhD (CY) Program Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. To teach basic aspects of spectroscopic methods, important analytical tools in academic 
research, chemical and pharmaceutical industries for structural characterization of organic 
molecules. 
2. Elucidation of structures of organic compounds using in-depth analysis of different 
spectroscopic data. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Ability to determine the structures of known/unknown organic molecules utilizing several 
spectroscopic techniques mentioned in the content. 
 
Contents 
Infrared Spectroscopy: Introduction to IR spectroscopy, Modes of stretching and bending, 
stretching frequencies of different organic functional groups, Effects of structural and 
conformational environment (3 lectures) 
Mass Spectrometry: Principles of mass spectrometry, Different ionization techniques (EI, CI, ESI 
etc.), GC-MS, HRMS, LC-MS and MS-MS techniques, Fragmentation and rearrangement of 
different classes of organic molecules, Isotope effects, Identification of known/unknown organic 
compounds (6 lectures) 
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy: Chemical shifts of different organic functional 
groups in 1H and 13C NMR, origin and interpretation of coupling constant, introduction to the 
principle and interpretation of DEPT, COSY, NOESY, NOE techniques, Structural elucidation of 
organic compounds (15 lectures) 
Ultraviolet-Visible Spectroscopy: Studies on conjugated and extended conjugated systems, 
analysis and interpretation of UV-Visible spectroscopic data, Application in mechanistic studies 
(3 lectures) 
Identification and Mechanistic Studies: Application of all above techniques in the structural 
elucidation of unknown organic compounds and investigation of organic reaction mechanisms 
(15 lectures)  
 
Text Books 
1. Donald L. Pavia, Gary M. Lampman, George S. Kriz, James A. Vyvyan: Introduction to 
Spectroscopy, 4th Edition, Brookes Cole, 2008. 
2. Robert M. Silverstein, Francis X. Webster, David Kiemle: Spectrometric identification of 
organic compounds, 7th Edition, Wiley, 2005. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Harald Gunther: NMR spectroscopy, Basic principles, concepts, and applications in 
chemistry, 2nd Ed., Wiley, 2001 (reprint) 
2. Timothy Claridge: High Resolution NMR Techniques in Organic Chemistry, 2nd Ed. Elsevier, 
2009 
3. Edmond de Hoffmann, Vincent Stroobant: Mass Spectrometry, Principles and applications, 
3rd Edition, Wiley, 2007 
 
Self Learning Material  
1. http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104103071/26 
 
 
      
552 
 
Title Stereochemistry of Organic Compounds Number CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for MSc/PhD (CY) Program Type Elective 
Prerequisite     
 
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. Provide understanding of representing stereochemical structures of organic molecules.  
2. Provide knowledge of designing synthetic routes to compounds containing one or more 
stereogenic centers and enantioselective syntheses.  
  
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand stereochemical nomenclature, classification of objects with regard to 
symmetry, desymmetrizations, stereochemical discrimination, separation of 
stereoisomers, and principles for stereoselective synthesis  
2. Learn about the key aspects of modern asymmetric synthesis, especially the origin of 
stereoselectivity and to be able to draw plausible TS to predict enantiofacial selectivity.  
 
Contents  
Introduction: Configuration, conformation, determination of structure, symmetry elements, 
Newman, Saw Horse, Zig-Zag and Fischer Projections, absolute stereochemistry (10 
lectures)  
Properties of Stereoisomers: Stereoisomer discrimination, nature of racemates, properties of 
racemates and their enantiomer components (3 lectures) 
Separation of Stereoisomers: Resolution, Crystallization, Chemical separation of enantiomers 
and diastereomers (3 lectures) 
Prostereoisomerism, Prochirality: Homotopic and heterotopic ligands, hetrotopicity and NMR, 
prochirality and centers (4 lectures) 
Conformation of Acyclic and cyclic Molecules: Conformation of Acyclic molecule, Physical and 
spectral properties of diastereomers and conformers, Conformational aspects of various ring 
size compound, stereochemistry of fused and bridged compounds (10 lectures)  
Stereoselective Synthesis: Convergent Synthesis, Distereoselective synthesis, 
Enantioselective synthesis and double stero-differentations (8 lectures) 
Chiroptical Properties: Optical activity, Anisotropic Refraction, Circular dichroism, application 
of optical activity, separation of stereoisomers by chiral HPLC (4 lectures)   
 
Textbooks  
1. Nasipuri, D., (2011), Stereochemistry of Organic Compounds, 3rd Edition, New Age 
2. Kalsi, P. S., (2017), Stereochemistry Conformation and Mechanism, 9th Edition, New Age  
 
References Books 
1. Gupta, S. S., (2017), Basic Stereochemistry of Organic Molecules, 1st Edition, Oxford 
University Press 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Basak, A, Stereochemistry, NPTEL Course Material, Stereochemistry, Department of 
Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104105086/ 
 
 
 
 
 
553 
 
 
Title Frontiers  in Organic Chemistry Number CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Sc./PhD (CY) Program Type Elective 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Give an in-depth exposure to the latest advances in organic synthesis 
2. Inculcating in students a research-oriented approach towards solving synthetic organic 
chemistry problems 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Advance their knowledge in strategizing and synthesis of complex organic compounds 
2. Systematically read, understand and interpret the research reported in journals 
3. Develop skills of scientific presentations and interpersonal skills  
 
Contents 
Protecting Group: Selectivity and requirement of protecting groups, protecting groups and 
their deprotection (5 lectures) 
Advanced Radical Chemistry: Radical substitution reactions, coupling reactions, radical 
mediated cyclizations, addition reaction involving radicals, radical chain reactions (5 
lectures) 
Cycloaddition Reactions: 1,3-dipolar cycloadditions, higher order cycloadditions, asymmetric 
cycloadditions. (5 lectures) 
Advanced Enolate Chemistry: Diastereoselective aldol reactions, Evan‟s chiral auxiliary, 
Ender‟s chiral auxiliary, diastereofacial selectivity, asymmetric aldol reactions, 
Organocatalyzed aldol reactions (7 lectures) 
Total synthesis of complex molecules: total synthesis of penicillin, estrone, sparteine, 
prostaglandins, synthesis of important pharmaceuticals (12 lectures) 
C-H functionalization and C-H activation: Transition metal free reactions, Pd, Cu, Rh  
catalyzed C-H activation reactions, remote C-H functionalization and activation reactions (8 
lectures)  
 
Text books 
1. Carriera, E.M., and Kvaerno,L., (2009), Classics in Stereoselective synthesis, Wiley-VCH 
2. Kurti,L., Czako,B., (2005), Strategic Applications of Named Reactions in Organic 
Synthesis, Elsevier 
3. Carey,F.A., Sundberg,R.J., (2007), Advanced Organic Chemistry, Part B: Reactions and 
Synthesis, 5th Edition, Plenum 
 
Reference books  
1. Hudlicky,T., and Reed,J.W., (2007) The Way of Synthesis, Wiley-VCH 
2. Nicolaou,K.C., and Snyder,S.A., (2003), Classics in Total Synthesis-II: Further Targets, 
Strategies, Methods, Wiley-VCH 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Punniyamurthy,T., Catalytic Asymmetric Synthesis, NPTEL Course Material, Department 
of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104103067/ 
      
 
  
554 
 
 
Title Heterocyclic Chemistry  Course No. CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry Structure (L-T-P:C) 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Sc./PhD (CY) Program Status Elective 
Pre-requisite  
 
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. Provide insight into the fundamental reactivity and synthesis of heterocycles, and 
2. Broaden their knowledge in the field of heterocyclic chemistry with regard to its 
application in the synthesis of natural products and pharmaceuticals. 
      
Learning Outcomes 
Students will be able to:  
1. Understand the basic heterocyclic principles and apply different types of organic 
reactions in the synthesis of small heterocyclic compounds. 
2. Learn the applications of modern organic synthetic tools in the efficient synthesis of   
heterocycles. 
3. Design and propose routes for the synthesis of natural products and pharmaceuticals 
based on heterocycles. 
 
Contents 
Introduction: Importance of heterocyclic compounds, Nomenclature of heterocyclic ring 
systems (3 lectures) 
Three-membered Heterocycles: Structure, reactivity and synthesis of Oxirane, Thiirane 
and Aziridine (3 lectures) 
Four-membered Heterocycles: Structure, reactivity and synthesis of four membered 
Heterocycles such as Oxetane, Thietane and Azetine (3 lectures) 
Five-membered Heterocycles: Structure, reactivity and synthesis of five membered 
Heterocycles such as Pyrrole and pyrrolidine, Thiophene and tetrahydrothiophene, Furan 
and tetrahydrofuran, chemistry of Pyrazole, Imidazole, Oxazole, Thiazole (10 lectures) 
Six-membered Heterocycles: Structure, reactivity and synthesis of Six membered 
Heterocycles: Pyridine and Piperidine, pyran and Tetrahydropyran, pyridones, Pyridine -N-
oxides (10 lectures) 
Polycyclic heterocycles: Structure, reactivity and synthesis of Indole, Quinoline and 
Isoquinoline, Coumarins and Chromones, benzimidazole and benzoxazole (5 lectures)  
Natural Products and Drugs: Synthesis of selected heterocyclic natural products, 
synthesis of important pharmaceuticals containing heterocycles (5 lectures)  
Modern Methods: Synthesis of heterocycles using modern sustainable methods (3 
lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. J. A. Joule and K. Mills, Heterocyclic Chemistry, 5th Ed., Wiley, 2010. 
 
Reference Books 
1. R. K. Bansal, Heterocyclic Chemistry, 5th Ed., New Age International Private Limited, 
2017. 
 
Self Learning Material  
1. NPTEL Lectures : Heterocyclic Chemistry- http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104105034/ 
 
 
 
 
 
555 
 
Title Polymer Chemistry Number CY7XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
      
Objectives 
1.  To give students an introduction to polymer world and plastics technology.  
2.  Students will learn the differences between the polymers and their industrial applications.  
3. Students should be aware of the synthetic and environmental risk as well as complete 
process and effort required to this end. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The student should be able to 
● 1.   Understand the general structure of polymers properties of polymers in solution. 
● 2.   Compare the mechanical properties of polymers based on their structures. 
● 3.   Understand industrial application of polymers. 
4.   Assess risks during chemical synthesis of polymer material. 
 
Contents 
Introduction to polymers; classifications of polymers (2 lectures), chain versus step growth 
process, determination of molecular weight of polymers and their distribution; ATRP (atom 
transfer radical polymerization), Ziegler-Natta and ring opening metathesis (8 lectures) 
     polymerizations: living polymerization, polymer microstructure; physical prope rties of 
polymers; network formation of macromolecules; postpolymerization modification. (8 
lectures)  
     Functional Polymeric Materials: organic/inorganic hybrid materials, porous polymers, 
biodegradable polymers, conducting polymers, smart materials, intelligent gels and 
coordination polymerization, systematic of synthetic polymers and biopolymers (8 lectures)  
     Polymer chemistry: Polymerization, kinetics, structure and decomposition; Polymers in 
solution: thermodynamics, phase equilibrium, diffusion, viscosity, polyelectrolytes and gels. 
(8 lectures) 
     Polymer synthesis in laboratory and characterization. (2 lectures) , Industrial polymerization 
processes. (4 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. P. C. Painter and M. M. Coleman: Fundamentals of Polymer Science, 2. ed., together with 
the problem sets. 
2. Brydson's Plastics Materials, (1993), Eighth edition, J. A. Brydson's, edited by M Gilbert. 
 
Reference Books  
1.  Polymer Chemistry by Charles E. Carraher, sixth edition.  
2.  The Chemistry of Polymers by John W. Nicholson, 3rd edition, RSC publishing. 
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Prof. Dibakar Dhara, IIT Kharagpur https://nptel.ac.in/courses/104105039/ 
 
 
 
 
 
556 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Inorganic Chemistry 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
557 
 
 
Title Main Group and Bioinorganic Chemistry Number CYL6XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Sc. (CY) Program Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Give better insight into chemistry of main group elements and bioinorganic chemistry 
2. Provide broad knowledge about properties and applications of compounds of main group 
elements and metal ions essential in biological systems. 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Appreciate chemistry of elements essential in biological systems. 
2. To understand structure and bonding concepts in chemistry of s- and p-block elements 
and systematic understanding of their chemical reactivity  
Contents  
Chemistry of main group elements: VSEPR and Point group symmetry, Synthesis, structure 
and bonding  in polyhedral boranes and carboranes, Wade‟s Rules, electron count, Isolobal 
analogy. B -N, P -N, S -N unit containing compounds. Compounds of Silicon, Zeolites. 
Hydrides, halides, oxides, nitrides of s - and p - block elements.  Allotropes of Carbon. 
Chemistry of halogens and Noble gases, Acid -base concept, Chemistry of S -block elements. 
Organometallic compounds of main group elements. (15 Lectures) 
Spectroscopic Characterization: NMR to study fluxionality and dynamic behavior in 
solution.(2 Lectures) 
Applications of main group compounds: Frustrated Lewis pairs and small molecule 
activation,Synthetic uses of main group complexes, Oxidizing/reducing agents. Precursors 
for materials deposition. Deposition of thin films of materials, with a strong focus on  
Chemical Vapour Deposition (CVD) and ALD.  (9 Lectures) 
PET and SPECT imaging: Overview of the development of radio-labelled p-block complexes 
for applications in PET and SPECT imaging (2 Lectures) 
Bioinorganic Chemistry: Transition metals in biolog y - their occurrence and function, active -
site structure, Metalloenzymes; O2 binding properties of heme (hemoglobin and myoglobin) 
and non -heme proteins hemocyanin & hemerythrin), co -operativity effect, Bohr Effect; 
representative synthetic models of heme and nonheme systems. Electron transfer proteins - 
active site structure and functions of ferredoxin, rubredoxin and cytochromes, and their 
comparisons. Metals in medicine. (12 Lectures) 
Textbooks  
1. Huheey, J. E., (2008), Inorganic Chemistry, 4th edition, Pearson 
2. Housecroft, C. E., and Sharpe, A. G., (2012), Inorganic Chemistry, 4th Edition, Pearson 
3. Miessler G. L., (2014), Inorganic Chemistry, 4th edition, Pearson 
Reference Books 
1. S. J. Lippard (1994) Principles of Bioinorganic Chemistry, University Science Books.  
2. Norman, N. C., (2014), Periodicity and the p-Block Elements, Oxford Primer Nos. 51,2nd 
Edition, Oxford University Press  
3. Atkins, P. (2010) Inorganic Chemistry, 5th Edition, Oxford University Press 
Self Learning Material  
1. Balakrishna, M. S., Chemistry of Main Group Elements, NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/117101105/  
2. Ray, D., Bioinorganic Chemistry, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Chemistry, 
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104105031/ 
 
 
 
558 
 
      Title Transition Metal and 
Organometallic Chemistry  
Number CYL6XX0 
Department Chemistry Structure L-T-P[C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Sc. (CY) Program Type  Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. To provide students with an overview of transition metal chemistry which form a 
foundation for students pursuing further studies in chemistry 
2. To provide students fundamental of organometallic compounds and their practical 
applications. 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the properties and reactivities of selected transition metal complexes with 
their structure and bonding 
 2.  Utilize the principles of transition metal coordination complexes in understanding      
      reactivity and properties of organometallic compounds 
  
Contents 
Coordination Compounds:  Survey of various ligands, coordination, thermodynamic stability, 
Isomerism, Irving-William series, chelate and macrocyclic effect. (5 Lectures) 
Bonding in Coordination Complexes:  VBT, CFT and MOT, Crystal Field Stabilization Energies 
and its applications, High and low spin complex, Jahn-Teller theorem. (8 Lectures) 
Reaction mechanisms  in Coordination complexes - substitution reactions in complex es, 
trans effect and its influence, water exchange, anation and base hydrolysis, 
stereochemistry, inner and outer sphere electron transfer mechanism (4 Lectures) 
Spectroscopic properties:  Color of the complexes,  Selection rules. Splitting of the free ion  
energy levels in Octahedral and Tetrahedral complexes.  Term Symbol, Orgel,  and Tanabe-
Sugano diagrams. (6 Lectures) 
Magnetic Properties: Origin of Magnetic moment, Effect of orbital contributions.(2 Lectures) 
Bonding and properties of organometallic compounds:  Ligands (carbonyl, olefins, 
phosphine, hydride, alkyls, carbines, carbenes). Compounds with carbonyl, olefins, effective 
atomic number (EAN) rule. Classification of ligands-sigma, pi-donor, pi-acceptor.(7 
Lectures) 
Bonding in organometallics: sigma and pi-back bonding, synthesis of organometallic 
compounds. Characterization by FTIR. (3 Lectures) 
Organometallic Reaction and catalysis: Oxidative addition, reductive elimination, CO 
insertion and migration reactions. Applications of Organometallic compounds in 
homogeneous catalysis – isomerization, hydrogenation reaction, hydroformylation, 
Monsanto acetic acid synthesis, C-C coupling reactions, polymerization and metathesis. (6 
Lectures) 
Text Books 
1. Weller, (2014), Inorganic Chemistry, 6th Edition, Oxford University Press 
2. Huheey, J. E. (2006), Inorganic chemistry: principles of structure and reactivity, 4th 
Edition, Pearson  
3. Crabtree, R. H. The Organometallic Chemistry of the Transition Metals, Wiley, 1998 
 
 
Reference Books 
1. Kettle, S.F.A., (2010), Physical Inorganic Chemistry, A Coordination Chemistry 
Approach, Springer 
2. Housecroft, C and Sharpe, A. G. (2012) Inorganic Chemistry, 4th Edition, Pearson 
      
Self Learning Material 
1. Ray, D Coordination Chemistry, NPTEL course material, Department of Chemistry, 
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104105033/ 
2. Samuelson, A.G., Introduction to Organometallic Chemistry, NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Inorganic and Physical Chemistry, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104108062/ 
 
 
 
559 
 
Title Solid State and Material Chemistry Number CYL6XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Sc. (CY) Program Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. To provide an overview of the relationships between molecular or solid state structures 
and material properties.  
2. To provide an interdisciplinary understanding of solid state chemistry which aims to 
provide an understanding of how molecular structure affects the properties of 
materials.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. The student will obtain required knowledge for understanding material science 
problems and structure of solids.  
2. Insight into electronic structure of crystals and compare it with the electronic structure 
of nanomaterials, chemical-physical fundamentals as well as basic method of 
characterisation of solids. 
 
Contents 
Structure of Solids: Crystalline and Amorphous, diffraction techniques, symmetry and point 
groups, packing in solids, classification, lattice energy, bonding, structures: NaCl, TiO 2, 
ZnS, wurtzite, Perovskite, covalent and ionic solids.(10 Lectures) 
Crystal defects: non-stoichiometry, cluster, diffusion, Fick‟s Law and Kirkendall effect, 
Identification of defects using microscopic techniques.(6 Lectures) 
Solid state reaction: Chemical and Physical Methods of preparation, reactivity of solids, 
decomposition mechanism, single crystal growth and thin film deposition. (10 Lectures)  
Band theory: Intrinsic and extrinsic semiconductors, insulators,density of states, 
Dielectrics, Hall effect, Thomson, Peltier and Seeback effects.(Lectures 8) 
Properties of Solids: Magnetic, Electrical and Optical properties, Different type of 
Magnetism and Superconductivity, Introduction to nanomaterials and properties.(Lectures 
6) 
 
Textbooks 
1. B. D. Cullity and S. R. Stock, (2014), Elements of X-ray diffraction, 3rd edition, Pearson  
2. West, A.R., (2015), Solid State Chemistry and Its Applications, 2nd edition, John Wiley 
& Sons 
3. Lesley E Smart and Elaine E Moore, (2005), Solid State Chemistry: An Introduction, 3rd 
Edition, Taylor and Francis 
 
Reference Books 
1. Cheetham, A.K. and Day, P., (1997), Solid State Chemistry Compounds, 2nd Edition, 
Clarendon Press, Oxford  
2. Harry R. Allcock, (2008), Introduction to Materials Chemistry, 1st Edition, Wiley. 
3. C N R Rao and J Gopalkrishnan, (2004) New Directions in Solid State Chemistry, 2nd 
Edition, Cambridge. 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Subramaniam, A, Structure of Materials, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Materials Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113104014/16 
 
 
 
 
 
560 
 
      Title Inorganic Chemistry Laboratory Number CYP6XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 0-0-3 [1.5] 
Offered for M.Sc.(CY) Program Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite  
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Emphasize on the different techniques of reaction set-up (air-sensitive, moisture-sensitive 
etc. involved in the synthesis, isolation and purification of inorganic compounds.  
2. Expose students to various spectroscopic identification and characterization techniques.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the basic principles behind the synthesis and properties of inorganic 
compounds. 
2. Plan and Conduct experiments for synthesis and characterizing inorganic compounds.  
      
Contents 
Laboratory Experiments: 
Non-metal complex: Synthesis and characterization of bispyridine iodide nitrate; Solid phase  
synthesis and characterization of trans-bis glycinato copper(II); Synthesis of penta  
amminechlorocobalt(III)chloride and its spectroscopic properties; Influence of ligand field 
tetragonality on the ground state spin of nickel(II) complexes with NH3 and H2O and  
ethylene diamine; Preparation and magnetic properties of FeIII(acac) complex; Preparation 
of TiO2 from Titanium Isopropoxide; Preparation and Characterization of Hydroxyapatite;  
Luminescent Ruthenium Complexes. Synthesis of RuHCl(CO)(PPh3)3 complex and its 
characterisation by 1H, 31P NMR and IR spectroscopy 
 
Text Books 
1. G. S. Girolami, T. B. Rauchfuss, R. J. Angelici Synthesis and Technique in Inorganic 
Chemistry, University Science Books, 3rd Ed, 1999. 
2. Elias, A. J., A Collection of Interesting General Chemistry Experiments, Universities 
Press(India) Pvt. Ltd., 2002 
 
Reference Books 
1. J. Derek Woolins, Inorganic Experiments, 3rd Edition, Wiley, 2010. 
2. Roesky, H. W.; Muckel, K., Chemical Curiosities: spectacular experiments and inspired 
quotes, VCH, 1996. 
3. Handouts prepared for the laboratory experiments: collections from various literature 
sources (ACS Chemical Education) 
 
Self Learning Material 
John Dolhun. 5.301 Chemistry Laboratory Techniques. January IAP 2012. Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology: MIT Open Courseware, https://ocw.mit.edu. 
 
 
 
 
 
561 
 
      
 
 
 
 
Elective  
of Inorganic Chemistry  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
562 
 
Title Catalysis for Energy  Number CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for MSc./PhD (CY) Program  Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. To give an overview about defining a roadmap for the role of catalysis in energy 
production 
2. Relate catalysis with fuel cells, hydrogen production and storage, methane storage and 
industrial catalysis 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the role and the possibilities of catalysis in the production of new energy 
carriers and in the utilization of different energy sources.  
2. to go beyond conventional application identifying new developments that may lead to 
breakthroughs in the production of alternative energy. 
 
Contents 
Catalysis: Introduction to heterogeneous catalysis, including models of surface reactivity, 
surface equilibria, kinetics of surface reactions, electronic and geometrical effects in 
heterogeneous catalysis.(Lectures 14) 
Catalytic reactions and application: Trends in reactivity, catalyst structure and composition, 
electro-catalysis and photo-catalysis.(Lectures 12) 
Selected applications and challenges in energy transformations: fuel cells, hydrogen 
production, OER and HER reactions, CO2 oxidation, methane and hydrogen storage and 
industrial catalysis. (Lecture 14) 
 
Textbooks  
1. Hanefeld, U, Lefferts, L. (2018) Catalysis: An Integrated Textbook for Students, 1st 
Edition, Wiley  
 
Reference Books:  
1. Okada, Tatsuhiro, Kaneko, Masao, (2009), Molecular Catalysts for Energy Conversion 
Springer. 
2. Guczi, László, Erdôhelyi, András, Catalysis for Alternative Energy Generation, Springer. 
3. Pierluigi Barbaro, Claudio Bianchini, Catalysis for Sustainable Energy Production, Wiley 
 
Self Learning Material 
1.  Xile Hu, Angamuthu, R and Bera, J. K., Catalysis for Energy Storage, GIAN Course 
material, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LvTfsIAI-VE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
563 
 
Title Nanomaterials and Nanodevices Number CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 2-0-1 [3] 
Offered for MSc/PhD (CY) Program  Type Elective 
Prerequisite  
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Underlying scientific basis for the behavior of nanomaterials 
2. Methods of synthesis, fabrication and characterization of nanomaterials 
3. Scope of nanomaterials and potential translation as products 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Able to describe the basic science behind the properties of materials at the nanometer 
scale 
2. Learn principles behind advanced experimental techniques for studying nanomaterials 
3. Systematically solve scientific problems related specifically to Nano technological 
materials 
 
Contents 
Concepts, Definitions and Examples: Nanoscale processes, nanosystems, nanostructures, 
important nanomaterials such as clusters, nanocrystals, nanotubes and nanowires. (2 
Lectures) 
Size-dependent properties: Quantum confinement, Bandgap, Surface effects in 
nanosystems. Optical, mechanical, electronic and magnetic properties along with surface 
reactivity.(6 Lectures) 
Synthesis of nanomaterials: Top-down and bottom-up, soft versus hard methods, chemical 
and physical methods, hybrid methods for synthesis of nanomaterials.(6 Lectures) 
Experimental methods for the study of nanomaterials:  Electron microscopes (SEM and 
TEM), scanning probe microscope (AFM and STM), X- ray photoelectron spectroscopy, BET 
surface area, electroanalytical techniques and miscellaneous methods (6 Lectures)  
Nanolithography for Nanodevices: Concepts and methods; fabrication of devices, clean room 
practices, optical, electron, ion- beam lithography, soft lithography, micromolding, 
nanoimprint lithography. (6 Lectures) 
Applications: Translating nanomaterials and nanodevices as commercial products.(4 
lectures)  
Laboratory Experiments 
 Synthesis of metal nanoparticles, Particle size analysis by UV Visible spectroscopy, 
synthesis of semiconducting ZnO nanoparticles, quantum dots, optical band gap analysis by 
emission spectrum, SEM imaging, AFM analysis, patterning by Photo/Soft 
Lithography,graphene synthesis and surface property analysis  
 
Text Books 
1. Pradeep, T., (2012), Textbook of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, Mc Graw Hill 
2. C. N. R. Rao, P. J. Thomas and G. U. Kulkarni (2007)Nanocrystals: Synthesis, 
Properties and Applications,Springer.   
Reference Books 
1. Nalwa, H. S., (2004), Encyclopedia of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, Edition 
American Scientific Publishers, Los Angeles 
2. Rao, C.N.R. and Govindaraj, A., (2005), Nanotubes and nanowires, RSC Publishing 
3. C. N. R. Rao, P. J. Thomas and G. U. Kulkarni (2007)Nanocrystals: Synthesis, 
Properties and Applications,Springer.  
Self Learning Material 
1. Subramaniam, A., Balani, K. Nanostructures and Nanomaterials: Characterization and 
Properties, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Materials Science & Engineering, 
Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/118104008/;  
 
 
 
 
564 
 
Title Compounds of p-block elements and 
Applications 
Number CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Sc./PhD (CY) Program  Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. To give better insights into the interesting class of compounds such as rings, clusters, 
polymers and low valent complexes of the main-group elements. 
2. To learn about the synthesis, structure and properties of inorganic heterocyclic and 
homocyclic rings. 
3. To discuss about structure, properties and reactivity of clusters and cages of main group 
elements. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Appreciate the interesting class of compounds such as rings, clusters and polymers of 
main group metal compounds. 
2. Gain deeper insights into the synthesis and reactivity of novel main group compounds.  
3. Understand structure-property relationships and applications of inorganic, organometallic 
polymers and low valent compounds. 
 
Contents  
Inorganic Rings: Synthesis, structure and reactivity of compounds containing heterocyclic 
rings of elements such as Phosphorus, Boron, Silicon, Tin and Aluminum. Structure and 
reactivity of compounds containing homocyclic rings of germanium, boron, silicon, 
aluminum. Synthesis and properties of inorganic macrocycles. (10 Lectures) 
Clusters: Clusters and Cages of Main Group Elements, Boron Hydrides and Carboranes. 
Homo and Heteropolyatomic Anions of the Post-Transition Elements. (8 Lectures) 
Inorganic polymers: Synthesis, structure -property relationships and applications of 
Polysiloxanes, Polyphosphazenes, polysilanes and organometallic polymers. (10 Lectures) 
Chemistry of Low valent compounds: Low valent compounds of main group elements, 
Recent advances in NHCs and their analogous group 13, 14 and 15 compounds. (6 Lectures)  
Applications: Main group element co ntaining rings, clusters and polymers as single source 
precursors for nanomaterials. Low valent compounds in small molecule activation. (9 
Lectures) 
 
Textbook 
1. Chivers, T. and Manners, I., (2009), Inorganic Rings and Polymers of the p-Block 
Elements, 1st Edition, Royal Society of Chemistry  
2. P. Atkins, (2008), Inorganic Chemistry, Indian Edition, 4th Ed, Oxford University Press 
 
References 
1. H. R. Allcock, (2003), Chemistry and Applications of Polyphosphazenes, Wiley 
2. V. Chandrasekhar, (2005), Inorganic and Organometallic Polymers, Springer-Verlag 
3. M. Driess, (2004), Molecular Clusters of the Main Group Elements, Wiley-VCH 
 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Balakrishna, M. S., Chemistry of Main Group Elements, NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/117101105/ 
 
 
 
 
565 
 
Title Advanced Materials Design Number CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry  L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Sc./PhD (CY) Program Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide a comprehensive overview of synthesis and characterization of bulk materials, 
nanoparticles, nanocomposites and hierarchical materials with nanoscale features. 
2. cover the fundamental scientific principles controlling assembly of nanostructured  
3. materials; synthesis, characterization tools; new properties at the nanoscale, and 
      existing and emerging applications of nanomaterials 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
1. Understand a variety of different methods for synthesizing materials. 
2. Evaluate the synthesis methods against each other and be able to make assessments as 
to what form the final products will be. 
3. Should be able to assess appropriate methods for the synthesis of stable nanomaterials 
 
Contents  
Introduction to Materials Chemistry: Structure, property and their relationship with materials 
performance (3 Lectures) 
Semiconducting Materials Chemistry: Semiconductor Devices, Phase Change Materials in 
Memory Technology, Thermoelectric, Superconductors, Topological Insulators, Emerging 
materials in the device industry such as graphene and 2D materials.(8 Lectures) 
Optical/Opto-electronic Materials: Light Emitting Diodes, Photosensors, Photovoltaics (3 
Lectures) 
Structural & Basic Applied Materials: Structural Materials, Amorphous Materials, Smart & 
Responsive Materials, Bio-inspired materials (8 Lectures) 
Thermal Materials Application: Thermochromics (2 Lectures) 
Energy Materials: Batteries and Supercapacitors, Fuel Cells,Hydrogen generation,Hydorgen 
storage, Carbon capture and sequestration (8 Lectures) 
Student Seminars on Selected Topics from above 
 
Textbooks  
1. Fahlman, Bradley, (2011), Materials Chemistry, 3rd Edition, Springer 
2. P. Yang (2003), The Chemistry of Nanostructured Materials, 1st Edition, World Scientific 
Publishing Company, Singapore  
 
Reference Books  
1. G. Cao, (2004), Nanostructures and Nanomaterials: Synthesis, Properties and 
Applications, Imperial College Press: Hackensack, NJ 
2. Goldstein, J.I. et al. (1992), Scanning Electron Microscopy and X-Ray Microanalysis: A 
Textbook for Biologists, Materials Scientists and Geologists, 2nd Edition, Springer, US.  
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Qureshi, M. Chemistry of Materials, NPTEL Course Material, Indian Institute of Technology 
Guwahati, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104103019/2 
 
 
       
566 
 
Course Title Characterization Techniques in       
 Inorganic Chemistry  
Course No. CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Pre-requisite  
 
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1.  To provide an introduction to various characterization methods that are applied to 
inorganic chemical systems. 
   
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Appreciate different important characterization methods that are applied to inorganic 
chemical systems. 
2. Analyze the chemical and physical characterization of molecular (solution and solid-
state) inorganic chemical systems. 
 
Contents 
Fundamental aspects of characterisation methods in inorganic chemistry. 
Molecular Symmetry: Point group analysis of simple inorganic compounds. Infrared and 
Raman spectroscopy of simple inorganic molecules; predicting number of active modes of 
vibrations, analysis of representative spectra of metal complexes with various functional 
groups. (6 Lectures) 
Electronic spectroscopy: electronic absorption and emission spectroscopy (4 Lectures) 
Multinuclear NMR: Use of 1H and 13C NMR to study  fluxionality and dynamics in inorganic 
and organometallic chemical systems;  NMR spectral analyses of B, Al, Si, F,  and P 
containing compounds. Inorganic and Organometallic compounds of some other NMR active 
nuclei will also be discussed. (11 Lectures) 
EPR: Elementary aspects of Electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy of 
inorganic compounds- g-values, hyperfine and super hyperfine coupling constants; selected 
applications in inorganic chemistry. (5 Lectures) 
Mass spectrometry: basic principles, ionization techniques, isotope abundance, molecular 
ion; illustrative examples from supramolecules, inorganic/coordination and organometallic 
compounds. (5 Lectures) 
X-ray and Photoelectron Spectroscopy: Electron microscopy and energy dispersive analysis 
of X-rays (5 Lectures) 
Cyclic voltammetry: Introduction to cyclic voltammetry and discussion on cyclic 
voltammogram of some representative examples. (5 Lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. R. S. Drago, Physical Methods for Chemists, 2nd Edition, Saunders, 1992. 
 
Reference Books 
1. M. Weller,  Inorganic Chemistry, 6th Edition, Oxford University Press, 2014. 
2. J. E. Huheey, Inorganic Chemistry, Principles of Structure and Reactivity, 4th Edition, 
Pearson, 2006. 
3. F. A. Cotton, Advanced Inorganic Chemistry, 6th Edition, Wiley, 2007. 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Alagarsamy P, Characterization of Materials NPTEL Course Material, Department of      
 Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati,https://nptel.ac.in/courses/115103030/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
567 
 
Course Title  Advance Catalysis  Course No.  CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry  L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  MSc/PhD (CY) Program Type  Elective 
Pre-requisite      
  
Objectives  
The instructor will: 
1. Provide knowledge of key aspects of organometallic chemistry including the different binding 
modes of organic ligands, variation in oxidation states and electron counts.   
2. Provide an understanding of the fundamental types of organometallic reaction, such as 
insertion, oxidative-addition  
  
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
1.  understand some fundamental organometallic transformations that underpin the catalytic 
formation of carbon-containing species.    
2. understand basic knowledge, skills and experience useful to those students progressing into 
the chemical industry and research in the area of catalysis  
  
Course Contents   
       Fundamentals of Catalysis :Definition, reaction coordinate diagram, homogeneous 
catalysis, mechanism, catalytic cycle, fundamental organometallic processes, ligand 
substitution, oxidative addition, migratory insertion, transmetallation, reductive elimination, 
transition metals versus homogeneous catalysts, turnover limiting step, features of a catalyti c 
process, Effective Atomic Number Rule (18-electron-rule). (8 Lectures) 
      Stereochemistry and Selectivity: Concepts and Definitions,  Isomers, constitution, 
configuration enantiomers and diastereomers, conformation, stereochemical terms-a primer, 
optical activity, methods for determination of enantiomeric excess-chiral stationary phase 
(CSP) GC and CSP-HPLC  and NMR. (8 Lectures) 
       Consequences of diastereoisomerism: (i) resolution of enantiomers via formation of 
diastereomeric salts, (ii) resolution via chromatography (GC and HPLC), (iii) identification of 
absolute stereochemistry, (iv) determination of enantiomeric ratio (er), or enantiomeric excess 
(ee), NMR shift reagents, (iv) diastereoselective synthesis, (v) kinetic resolution, examples and 
(vi) enantioselective synthesis, examples. (7 Lectures)  
      Hammond Postulate: Kinetic and Thermodynamic Control.  Kinetic and thermodynamic 
control, use of energy diagrams, examples: DBr addition to 1,3-butadiene, enolate formation 
from 2-methylcyclohexanone, Hammond postulate, examples: Markovnikov regioselectivity of 
HX addition to monosubstituted alkenes, Orientation in electrophilic aromatic substitution 
reactions (7 Lectures)    
      Asymmetric Catalysis Using Organometallic Reagents: Hammond Postulate and Curtin 
Hammett Concepts, Methods and Origin of Selectivity. CurtinHammett principle,reactivity of 
conformations pyrolytic elimination, Felkin-Anh model for predicting acyclic stereoselection, 
[Rh(L*)]+ X– , L* =chiral ligand)]-catalyzed asymmetric hydrogenation of dehydroamino-acids 
for the synthesis of enantiopure alpha-amino-acids Diastereomeric intermediates and origin of 
selectivity, Pd(0)-catalyzed allylation of stabilized carbon nucleophiles and Rh Catalyzed 
hydrogenation two classical examples with different reaction profiles (10 Lectures) 
  
Text Books  
1. 1. F A Cotton, G. Wilkinson, C A Murillo and M Bochmann, Advanced Inorganic Chemistry, 6th 
ed, 1999, WileyInterscience  
2. 2.C Elschenbroich and A Salzer, Organometallics, VCH Publishers, 1st ed 1989, 2nd ed 1993.  
3. 3. R H Crabtree, The Organometallic Chemistry of the Transition Metals, Wiley, 1998  
Reference Books 
4. 1. Ashutosh Tiwari and Salam Titinchi, Advanced Catalytic Materials, Wiley, 2015 
Self Learning Material 
5. 1. NREL Learning,  Biofuels and Bioproducts through Catalysis, 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=srCZqrC4dEo 
6.  
568 
 
Course Title  Water Chemistry   Course No.  CYL7XX0 
Department  Chemistry  L-T-P [C] 2–0–1 [3] 
Offered for  BTech/MTech/MSc/PhD(CY) Program  Type  Elective 
Pre-requisite   Consent of Teacher   
  
Objectives  
The instructor will: 
1. Provide the objective of this course is to provide a fundamental and advance 
understanding of the chemical and biochemical processes that are involved in water 
treatment for drinking purposes and treatment of industrial and domestic wastewaters for 
water reuse and discharge to the environment  
2. Provide knowledge of the key chemical processes relevant to research in water chemistry  
  
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
1. Perform quantitative and qualitative interpretations for water quality analysis 
2. Apply concepts of chemical equilibrium to solve water related practical problems  
  
Course Contents   
Polar nature of water, Acids and bases, Buffering capacity of water (3 Lectures)  
Equilibrium constant expressions,aqueous system including concentration, activities, activity 
coefficients and pH of equilibrium. (4 Lectures) 
Chemical reaction equation and Arrenhius and Bronsted-Lowry acids and bases (4 Lectures) 
Ionization constant reactions and expressions, Self-Ionization of water, Solubility-product 
expressions (4 Lectures) 
Measuring pH, Filtration, Alkalinity and aqueous titrations (3 Lectures) 
Cycling of water and residence time (3 Lectures)  
Water availability,usage, quality and water treatment methods (5 Lectures)  
Analytical methods for water quality analysis (6 lectures) 
Laboratory Experiments 
 Measuring color in water, removing turbidity, acidity determination, alkalinity determination, 
chloride in water, hardness test for water, dissolved oxyzen by winkler‟s method 
 
Reference Books  
1. 1. Sawyer, C., McCarty, P., & Parkin G, Chemistry for Environmental and Engineering Science.  
5th Edition. Toronto: McGraw-Hill, 2003 
2. 2. Mark M. Benjamin, 2015, Water Chemistry, Waveland Press, Second Edition, ISBN 1-4786-
2308-X  
Text Books   
1. 1.Werner Stumm, James J. Morgan, Aquatic Chemistry: Chemical Equilibria and Rates in 
Natural Waters, 3rd Edition, Wiley  
2. 2. Kerry J. Howe, David W. Hand, John C. Crittenden, R. Rhodes Trussell, Principles of Water 
Treatment,  George Tchobanoglous, Wiley  
Self Learning Material 
1. NPTEL Lectures: https://nptel.ac.in/courses/122106030/ 
 
 
 
 
 
      
569 
 
Title Frontiers in Organometallic Catalysis Number CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
1. To impart advanced knowledge on frontiers of organometallic chemistry.  
2. To teach practical applications of organometallic compounds in homogeneous catalysis 
particularly relevant to industrial applications. 
Learning Outcomes  
1. The learners are expected to gain knowledge of independent thinking in designing, 
characterizing and fine tuning of organometallic complexes suitable for potential catalytic 
transformations. 
2. Learners will be able to delineate mechanistic proposal of catalytic reactions based on the 
available experimental data. 
3. Learners will have an update on current trends and challenges of organometallic chemistry 
towards molecular activation and organic transformations focusing on sustainable 
development. 
Contents  
1.Introduction: Basics of organometallics, 18 e- rule, sigma and pi donor/acceptor ligands 
(5 lectures) 
2. Synthetic, characterization and reactivity strategies of Transition Metal hydrides bearing 
carbonyl, nitrosyl, carbene, phosphine, olefins, and so on as ancillary ligands. Inert bonds 
(C-H, C-C, O-H, N-H) and small molecules (H2, CO, CO2) activation mediated by 
organometallic complexes. (12 lectures) 
3. Definition and concepts of catalysis: Important terminologies in catalysis  
Hydrogenation, dehydrogenation, dehydrogenative coupling reactions, hydrosilylation, 
hydroformylation, hydroamination, hydrocyanation, hydrozirconation, carbonylation, 
Wacker oxidation, Fischer Tropsch synthesis, water gas shift reaction, Olefin 
polymerization, olefin metathesis, Mechanistic pathway interpretation: Kinetic studies, 
Deuterium Kinetic Isotope effect, Rate limiting step, Resting state, Scrambling 
experiments. (13 lectures) 
4. Approaches towards Sustainability using organometallic complexes: Pincer catalysts 
design, Utilization of CO2 and other feed stocks; Sustainable Energy: H2 economy, 
Methanol economy, Liquid organic hydrogen carrier. (6 lectures) 
5.Frustrated Lewis pair Chemistry: Hydroboration, carboboration, small molecule 
activation, catalysis. (5 lectures)   
Textbooks 
1. Crabtree, R. H. The Organometallic Chemistry of the Transition Metals, Wiley, 1998 
2. Gupta, B. D.; Elias, A. J. Basic Organometallic Chemistry: Concepts, Syntheses and 
Applications Paperback, Universities Press; 2nd Edition (May 30, 2013). 
Reference Books  
1. Collman J. P.; Finke R. G.; Norton J. R. Principles & Applications of Organo-transition Metal 
Chemistry, University Science Books 
2. Bhaduri S.; Mukesh, D. Homogeneous Catalysis: Mechanisms and Industrial Applications  
Self Learning Material 
1. Maiti, D. Organometallic Chemistry, NPTEL Course Material, Indian Institute of Technology 
Bombay, 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ITfwjQemwMg&list=PLj_Alq7xw30l8iUgacWidP_83A0r
ZqlBR&index=1 
570 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Physical Chemistry 
      
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
571 
 
Title Quantum Chemistry and Spectroscopy Number CYL6XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Attempt to provide an advanced level understanding of quantum chemistry 
2. Will show a few applications of quantum mechanics to chemistry  
3. Establish the relation between fundamentals of spectroscopy and quantum chemistry  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
1. Understand quantum mechanics and applications to chemistry problems such as 
minimum energy path search, single point calculation and geometry optimization.  
2. Apply spectroscopic methods as analytical tool in chemistry, biology, material science, 
medicine 
 
Contents  
Fundamentals: Old Quantum theory, Correspondence principle, Bohr-Sommerfeld 
quantization, Wave-particle duality, Stern-Gerlach experiment (9 lectures)   
Mathematical Formalism: Operators, Eigenfunctions and eigenvalues, Operators in quantum 
mechanics, expectation values, Theorems of Quantum Mechanics, Commuting and non -
commuting operators, Angular momentum (10 lectures)  
Exactly Solvable Problems: Time independent and time dependent wave equation, Particle 
confined to infinite and finite potential wells, Harmonic oscillator, Rigid rotor, Hydrogen atom 
(10 lectures)  
Approximation Methods: Variational principle, Perturbation theory, Energy and wave function 
corrections, Born-Oppenheimer approximation (8 lectures)  
Introduction to spectroscopy: Introduction to rotational, vibrational spectroscopy, electronic 
transitions, Frank-Condon principle, vertical transitions – selection rules, parity, symmetry 
and spin selection rule (5 lectures)  
 
Textbooks  
1. Levine, I. N., (1983), Quantum Chemistry, 3rd Edition, Allyn and Bacon  
  
Reference Books  
1. McQuarrie,D. A., (1983), Quantum Mechanics, 2nd Edition, University Science Books  
2. Bernath,P. F., (2005), Spectra of Atoms and Molecules, 2nd Edition, Oxford University 
Press, London 
3. Banwell,C. N., (2010), Fundamentals of Molecular Spectroscopy, 4th Edition, Tata 
McGraw Hill, New Delhi 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Krishnan, M. S., Introduction to Quantum Chemistry and Molecular Spectroscopy, NPTEL 
Course Material, Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104106083/ 
 
 
 
572 
 
Title Molecular Thermodynamics and Chemical 
Kinetics 
Number  CYL6XX0 
 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
 The Instructor will: 
1. Provide the connection between microscopic theory and thermodynamics.  
2. Describe how complex phenomena can be transferred into simple models. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
1. Predict properties of many-body systems starting from its microscopic  
constituents and their interactions 
2. Connect microscopic theory to chemical reaction 
   
  
CYL6XX1: Thermodynamics [1-0-0] 
thermodynamics laws, state and path functions and their applications; thermodynamic description of 
various‎types‎of‎processes;‎Maxwell’s‎relations;‎spontaneity‎and‎equilibria 
Temperature‎and‎pressure‎dependence‎of‎thermodynamic‎quantities;‎Le‎Chatelier’s‎principle‎(14‎
lectures). 
  
CYL6XX2: Statistical Thermodynamics [1-0-0] 
Micro and macro states, canonical, micro canonical and grand canonical ensemble, 
Boltzmann distribution; kinetic theory of gases; partition functions, thermodynamic 
properties from partition functions for model systems; Debye-Huckel theory (14 lectures). 
    
CYL6XX3: Chemical Kinetics [1-0-0] 
Empirical rate laws and temperature dependence; complex reactions; steady state 
approximation, determination of reaction mechanisms  
Mechanism: Theory of reaction rates, activation energy, transition state theory, potential 
energy surface, uni-molecular reaction rate, enzyme kinetics, salt effects (14 lectures). 
Text Books  
1. D. McQuarrie and J. D. Simon, (2014) Molecular Thermodynamics, Viva Books. 
2. D. McQuarrie, (2011) Physical Chemistry, A Molecular Approach, Viva Books.  
 
Self Learning Material  
1. D. McQuarrie, (2000) Statistical Mechanics, University Science Books. 
2. K. J. Laidler, (2013) Chemical Kinetics, Pearson. 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. V.Balakrishnan, Department of Physics, IIT Madras. http://nptel.iitm.ac.in 
2. Leonard Susskind, Statistical Mechanics, Stanford University, 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D1RzvXDXyqA&t=901s 
3. De, A. K. Advanced Chemical Thermodynamics and Kinetics, NPTEL Course Material, 
Chemical Sciences, IISER Mohali, https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc18_cy20/ 
 
  
573 
 
 
Title Theory and Applications of Spectroscopic 
Techniques   
Number CYL6XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce to theoretical background of spectroscopic methods along with their 
instrumentation and application.   
2. Enable students to use such methods whenever needed by giving hands on experience 
with available instruments in the institute.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
1. Apply spectroscopic methods as analytical tool in chemistry, biology, material science, 
medicine.  
2. Operate various spectrometers available in the institute. 
 
Contents  
CYL6XX1: Electronic Spectroscopy [1-0-0] 
Properties of electromagnetic radiation, interaction of radiation with matter, Stimulated and 
Spontaneous processes, Einstein coefficient, Rabi Oscillation, intensity of spectral line and 
line shape, Fourier Transformation, General understanding of spectroscopic selection rule. 
UV-vis and Fluorescence Spectroscopy:  Basic principles, Laws of photochemistry, Jablonski 
diagram, Frank -Condon principle, quantum yield expression and Stern -Volmer equation, 
FRET. (14 lectures) 
CYL6XX2: Infrared and Raman Spectroscopy [1-0-0] 
Basic principle; Organic functional group identification through IR spectroscopy, IR and 
Raman activity. (14 lectures) 
CYL6XX3: NMR and EPR Spectroscopy [1-0-0] 
NMR Spectroscopy: Basic principle, Zeeman splitting, chemical shift and spin-spin coupling, 
introduction to AB, AX, AMX spin system, 1D 1H and 13C NMR for structure elucidation, 
Polarization transfer methods and NOE. EPR Spectroscopy: basic principle, Electron-nuclear 
hyperfine interaction, theory of first order EPR spectra, analysis of 1st Order spectra, 
example of EPR spectra of organic radicals and transition metal complexes.  (14 lectures)  
 
Textbooks  
1. Gunther, H., (1995), NMR Spectroscopy, 2nd Edition, Wiley 
2. Banwell, C. N., (1994), Fundamentals of Molecular Spectroscopy, 3rd Edition, Tata 
McGraw-Hill Book Company 
3. Lakowicz, J. R., (2006), Principles of Fluorescence Spectroscopy, 3rd Edition, Springer, 
New York  
 
Reference Books 
1. Bernath, P. F., (2005), Spectra of Atoms and Molecules, 2nd Edition, Oxford University 
Press  
2. Silverstein, R. M. and Webster, F. M., (2010), Spectroscopic Identification of Organic 
Compounds, 6th Edition, Wiley 
Self Learning Material  
1. Mangal Sundar, K.,  Introduction to Quantum Chemistry and Molecular Spectroscopy, 
http:// http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104106083 
2. Trivedi, V. and Chaudhary, N., Bioanalytical Techniques and Bioinformatics, Department 
of Biotechnology, http:// http://nptel.ac.in/courses/ 102103044.  
3. Das, R., Principles and Applications of Electron Paramagnetic Resonance Spectroscopy, 
Department of Chemical Sciences, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/104106048/2 
 
574 
 
 
Course Title Physical Chemistry Laboratory Course No. CYP6XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 0-0-3 [1.5] 
Offered for M.Sc. (CY) Program Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite   
 
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. Introduction to the different spectroscopic and analytical techniques.  
2. Introduction to the instrumentation and application of these methods.   
3. Enable students to use such methods whenever needed by giving hands on experience 
with available instruments in the institute.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Clear understanding of different analytical instruments.  
2. Experimental verification of fundamental concept 
3. Application of spectroscopic techniques as analytical tool in chemistry.  
Course Content 
1. Determination of the pI of an Amino Acid using pHmeter. 
2. Determination of critical micellar concentration by conductometry and calculation of free 
energy of micellization 
3. Determination of Heat Capacity of metals by Dynamic Scanning Calorimeter and 
verification of Dulong and Petit Method 
4. Determination of the ligand-protein binding constant using Fluorescence quenching 
technique 
5. Determination of 1H spin-lattice relaxation time by NMR Inversion Recovery method 
6. Determination of Gibbs free energy of the keto-enol tautomerism by 1H NMR 
7. Determination of bromobenzene surface coverage on silica by FTIR 
8. Study of surface properties (surface energy and surface tension) of various surfaces and 
solutions. 
9. Study of Redox reactions for understanding the reversibility of the reactions using cycli c 
voltammetry 
10. Surface Adsorption Kinetics of Dyes on activated carbon using UV-Visible 
spectroscopy/calorimetry 
 
Text   Text Books 
1. Halpern, A. M.; McBane, G. C. Experimental Physical Chemistry: A laboratory Textbook, 
3rd ed. W. H. Freeman, 2006.  
Reference Books  
Literature papers from ACS Chemical Education 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
575 
 
 
Title Computational Chemistry Laboratory Number CYP6XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 0-0-3 [1.5] 
Offered for M.Sc. (CY) Program Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite CYL6XX0 (Chemical Binding) Or Equivalent    
 
Objectives  
 The Instructor will: 
1. Provide the connection between theory and experiments 
2. Provide the understanding of how complex phenomena can be transferred into simple 
models. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
1. Learn tools and techniques used in computational chemistry. 
2. Develop computational skills related to chemistry. 
 
Contents  
1.Drawing the geometry of a molecule - Read XYZ coordinates - measure bond distances and 
angles (MOLDEN). 
2.Using a fixed nuclear geometry, compute the ground state electronic energy of a molecule 
using Hartree-Fock, MP2, and DFT. 
3.Perform geometry optimization (energy minimization) using different theories. 
4.Compute the vibrational frequencies and differentiate a minimum and a saddle point.  
5.Calculate potential energy profile and intrinsic reaction coordinate of a reaction. 
6.Learn visualizing bulk system using computer (VMD). 
7.Build bonded and non-bonded potential parameters after geometry optimization. 
8.Energy minimization of a bulk system at meso-scale. 
9.Different ensembles, NVT, NPT, NVE. 
 
Text Books  
1. Levine, I. N., (1983), Quantum Chemistry, 3rd Edition, Allyn and Bacon  
2. Molecular Modelling: Principles and Applications, Andrew Leach, 2nd Edition, Pearson. 
3. Daan Frenkel and Berend Smit, (2002) Understanding Molecular Simulation, Academic 
Press. 
 
Reference books  
1. Mark E. Tuckerman, Statistical Mechanics, (2010) Theory and Molecular Simulations, 
Oxford University Press. 
2. Szabo, A.and Ostlund, N.S. (1996), Modern Quantum Chemistry, Dover. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
576 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electives of Physical 
Chemistry 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
577 
 
 
Title Numerical Methods and Group 
Theory 
Number CYL6XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Pre-requisite    
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. Basic mathematics and numerical techniques required for Chemistry students 
2. Knowledge on error analysis to be used for laboratory courses  
3. Provide the fundamentals of group theory to understand structure, chemical bonding and 
spectroscopy   
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Ability to analyze data and perform error analysis on the data  
2. Ability to understand and appreciate the mathematical and group theoretical concepts behind 
chemical theories  
 
Contents 
Mathematical Concepts: Vectors and Vector spaces, Operators, Orthogonal and Unitary 
matrices, Diagonalization, Matrix eigenvalue problems, Systems of linear algebraic equations, 
Determinants, Ordinary and partial differential equations, Fourier and Laplace transformation 
(15 lectures)  
Numerical Methods: Errors in Data, Absolute and relative errors, Distribution of Errors, Central 
Limit Theorem, Linear regression and correlation, Interpolation, Roots of Equations, Algorithms 
for Matrix (15 Lectures) 
Group Theory: Symmetry elements and Point Groups, Group postulates and definitions, Group 
multiplication tables, Subgroups and cosets, Symmetry classes and conjugates, Reducible and 
irreducible representations, Representations and character tables, Group theory and quantum 
mechanics, Group theory and chemical bonding, Applications of group theory to structures and 
spectroscopy, Group theory and crystal symmetry (12 Lectures) 
      
Text Books 
1. Kreyszig, E., (2011) Advanced Engineering Mathematics, 9th Ed., Wiley 
2. Cotton, F. A., (2008) Chemical Applications of Group Theory, 3rd Ed., Wiley India 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Louis, L., (1991) A Practical Guide to Data Analysis for Physical Science students, Cambridge 
University Press 
2. Louis, L., (2005) Mathematics for Science Students, Cambridge University Press 
3. Arfken, W. and Harris, P. (2012) Mathematical Methods for Physicists, 7th Ed., Elsevier 
 
Self Learning Material: 
1. Iyengar, S. R. K., Numerical Methods and Computation, NPTEL course material, Department 
of Mathematics, IIT Delhi 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=88ys5ZIolSg&list=PL6E313980EF23CA6E 
2. Chandra, M., Chemical Applications of Symmetry and Group Theory, NPTEL course material, 
Department of Chemistry, IIT Kanpur 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Av9f25sqLG0&list=PLj_Alq7xw30knZPTpa9whzqiSn_RZHG
WP 
 
 
      
578 
 
Title Chemical Binding  Number CYL6XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Pre-requisite Basic Quantum Chemistry    
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide high level understanding of a chemical bond using quantum mechanics.  
2. Describe knowledge of modern techniques in quantum chemistry. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
1.  Use modern quantum chemistry techniques to solve fundamental problems related to basic 
chemistry. 
2.  Understand a chemical bond. 
 
Contents  
CYL6XX1: Multi-electron systems [1-0-0] 
  
Electronic structure: Variation theory, perturbation theory, electron spin, He atom, Pauli 
exclusion principle, Slater determinant (14 lectures) 
  
CYL6XX2: Electronic structure theory [2-0-0] 
  
Electronic structure of diatomic molecules: Born Oppenheimer approximation, Atomic units, 
H2
+ ion, H2 molecule, VB theory, MO theory, Semi-empirical methods (13 lectures) 
Wave function based theory: Hartree-Fock theory, Electron correlation, Self-consistent field 
wave function, Moller-Plesset theory, Coupled cluster formulation (12 lectures) 
Density functional theory (DFT):  Principles of density functional theory, commercial 
functionals and applications (3 lectures)   
 
Textbook 
1. Levine, I. N., (2000) Quantum Chemistry, Pearson education. 
2. Lowe, J. P., (1995) Elementary Quantum Chemistry, Academic Press. 
 
Reference Books 
1.  Szabo, A. and Ostlund, N. S., (1996) Modern Quantum Chemistry, Dover. 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. K. Mangala Sunder, Introduction to Chemistry & Quantum Chemical Methods, NPTEL course 
material, Department of Chemistry, IIT Madras, http://nptel.iitm.ac.in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
579 
 
Title Principles of Nuclear Magnetic Resonance  Number CYL6XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduction to Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectroscopy with an emphasis on 
the basic principle along with instrumentation and application.  
2. Enable students to understand the design of NMR experiments and analyze NMR 
spectrum to extract information of interest.   
3. Introduce to NMR experiments by giving hands on experience on the instrument 
available in the institute.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
1. Understand the theoretical background of solution state NMR.  
2. Apply NMR experimental methods as an analytical tool in chemistry, biology, material 
science, medicine for structure and dynamic studies of molecules.   
3. Understand instrumentation of NMR spectrometer available in the institute. 
 
Contents  
Introduction to NMR: Spin density operator, concept of density matrix, Liouville-Von-
Neuman equation, the nuclear spin Hamiltonian- gyromagnetic ratio –energy level Diagrams-
Zeeman Splitting. (12 lectures) 
Introduction to NMR parameters: Chemical shifts and couplings, longitudinal and transverse 
relaxation process – Redfield relaxation theory – paramagnetic relaxation, correlation times 
and relaxation times. (10 lectures) 
Introduction to 1D Fourier Transform spectroscopy: Bloch equation in the rotating frame – 
pulse sequence design – 1D 1H and 13C NMR for structure elucidation – measurement of 
relaxation rates, Nuclear Overhauser effect, effect of chemical exchange. (10 lectures) 
Introduction to 2D NMR, correlation spectroscopy: common pulse sequences –homo and 
hetero nuclear correlation spectroscopy –examples of COSY, TOCSY and NOESY – Application 
–chemical structure –biological processes – molecular dynamics etc.  
aboratory demonstration of standard NMR experiments. (10 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Farrar, T.C. and Becker, E.D., (1971), Pulse and Fourier Transform NMR, 1st Edition, 
Academic Press 
2. Gunther, H., (1995), NMR Spectroscopy, 2nd Edition, Wiley 
3. Derome, A. E., (1987), Modern NMR Techniques for Chemistry Research, 1st Edition, 
Pergamon Press  
 
Reference Books 
1. Ernst, R. R., Bodenhausen, G. and Wokaun, A., (1987), Principles of Nuclear Magnetic 
Resonance in One and Two Dimension, 2nd Edition, Clarendon Press  
2. Claridge, T. D. W., (1999), High Resolution NMR Techniques in Organic Chemistry, 1st 
Edition, Elsevier 
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Atreya, H. S., Principles and Applications of NMR Spectroscopy, NPTEL Course Material, 
NMR Research Center, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, 
https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc18_ge07 
 
 
580 
 
Title Molecular Dynamics Simulations Number CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry  L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide high level understanding of the connection between dynamics of molecules 
and their macroscopic properties 
2. Describe modern techniques in molecular simulations using high speed computers 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
1. Use modern simulation techniques to solve fundamental problems related to 
interdisciplinary areas of Physics, Chemistry and Biology 
2. Find explanations for phenomena related to soft condensed matter 
 
Contents  
Basics of Molecular Dynamics: Theoretical foundation of classical statistical mechanics, 
Boltzmann‟s relation, harmonic oscillator and harmonic baths, introduction to molecular 
dynamics, Algorithms for equations of motions (10 lectures), 
 
Various ensembles: Purpose of ensembles in simulations, canonical ensembles, isobaric 
ensembles, grand canonical ensembles, applications of ensembles, thermostat,  Barostat (10 
lectures) 
Advance Techniques: Free energy perturbation theory, Thermodynamic Integration, 
Jarzynski‟s equality, Umbrella Sampling (10 lectures) 
Applications:  How to set up Membrane system, protein and small biological molecules (12 
lectures)  
 
Textbooks  
1. D. Frenkel and B. Smith, (2002), Understanding Molecular Dynamics Simulations,1st 
Edition, Academic Press  
2. Mark Tuckermann, (2010), Statistical Mechanics and Molecular Simulations, 1st Edition, 
Oxford University  
 
Self Learning Material  
1. M. P. Allen and T. J. Tildesley., (1993), Computer Simulations of liquids, 1st Edition, 
Oxford Science Publications  
 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. Banerjee, T. Molecular simulations, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Chemical 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/103103036/ 
2. Tembe, B.L., Computational Chemistry and Classical Molecular Dynamics, NPTEL Course 
Material, Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, 
https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc18_cy13 
 
 
 
 
 
      
581 
 
Course Title Solid State NMR Methods for Materials Number  CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
The course will enable 
1. Introduction to essential techniques of solid state NMR 
2. Introduction to various spin interactions important in solid state e.g., chemical shift 
anisotropy, dipolar coupling etc.  
3. To enable students to understand the design of solid state NMR experiments and 
analyze NMR spectrum to extract information on solid state structure and dynamics.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Have basic understanding of the theoretical background of solid state NMR. 
2. Application of solid state NMR in the field of materials relevant in medicine, renewable 
energy, polymers etc. 
3. Understanding of various solid state methods that can be applied to characterize 
materials of interest.  
 
Contents  
Introduction to various nuclear spins other than 1H relevant for solid state materials: 
quadrupolar nuclei, concept of chemical shift anisotropy (CSA), scalar coupling, dipolar 
coupling and quadrupolar interactions, relation between shielding tensor and electronic 
structure, powder averaging. (8 lectures) 
Introduction to nuclear spin Hamiltonian relevant in solid state: cross polarization, isotropic 
mixing Hamiltonian, solid state echo sequence, Homo and heteronuclear decoupling, concept 
of spin diffusion and polarization transfer, concept of Nuclear Quadrupole Resonance (NQR) 
(10 lectures) 
Introduction to NMR techniques: powder line shape, determination of anisotropy, Magic 
Angle Spinning (MAS), generation of spinning sideband patterns, sideband modulation, 
molecular structure and dynamics determination by probing ssb manifolds, Techniques for 
measuring CSA and orientation of shielding tensor, measurement of homo and 
heteronuclear dipolar coupling, correlation experiments. (10 lectures) 
Introduction to molecular dynamics: powder line shape analysis-relaxation time studies-2D 
rotor synchronization and Exchange Spectroscopy (EXSY). (10 lectures) 
Application of solid state NMR: in polymers, nanomaterials, drugs, narcotics, explosives etc., 
recent advances in 1D solid state methods for dynamics, application of NQR. (4 lectures)  
 
Text Books 
1. Duer, J. M., (2005), Introduction to Solid State NMR, Wiley. 
Reference Books 
1. Ernst, R. R., Bodenhausen, G., Wokaun, A., (1987), Principles of Nuclear Magnetic 
Resonance in One and Two Dimension, Clarendon Press, Oxford.  
2. Bakhmutov, V. I., (2011), Solid-State NMR in Materials Science- Principles and 
Applications, CRC Press. 
Self Learning Material 
1. Atreya, H. S., Principles and Application of NMR spectroscopy, NMR Research Center, 
IISC Bangalore, https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc18_ge07/preview 
2. Molugu, T. R., Lee, S., Brown, M. F., Concepts and Methods of Solid State NMR 
Spectroscopy Applied to Biomembranes, 2017, Chem. Rev., 117, 12087-12132 
3. Dybowski, C., Bai, S., Solid State NMR Spectroscopy, 2008, Anal. Chem., 80, 4295-
4300.  
 
  
582 
 
 
Title Group Theory and Molecular Spectroscopy Number CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for MSc./Ph.D. (CY) Program Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide basic and advanced group theoretical concepts and their applications in bonding,    
spectroscopy, and solid state chemistry. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
1. Analyze and understand the concept of point group and symmetry associated with 
molecular frameworks  
2. Apply the knowledge of group theory to understand bonding, and structure in chemical 
species.   
 
Contents  
Introduction: The nature of the problem, symmetry operations, elements and operators, 
groups and group theory- general definitions, defining, deriving and recognizing point groups, 
subgroups and cosets, classes, group multiplication table (10 Lectures) 
Theory of group representations: The great orthogonality theorem, character of a 
representation, reducible and irreducible representations, construction of character tables and 
physical interpretation, application of representation theory in quantum mechanics, direct-
product groups (10 Lectures) 
Applications to Chemical Bonding and spectroscopy: Molecular orbitals, applications to valence 
bond theory and molecular orbital theory, bonding in homonuclear diatomic molecules of 
transition metal, molecular orbitals in complex compounds, Huckel molecular orbital theory, 
application of group theory to UV-Visible, IR and Raman spectroscopy (14 Lectures) 
Group theory and crystal symmetry: Crystal systems and classes, translational and space 
groups, symmorphic and nonsymmorphic space groups, applications of space group, factor 
group (8 Lectures) 
  
Textbooks 
 
1. Cotton, F. A., (1990) Chemical Applications of Group Theory, 3rd edition Wiley-Interscience  
2. Vincent, A., (2013) Molecular Symmetry and Group Theory: A Programmed Introduction to 
Chemical Applications, 2nd Edition Wiley 
 
Reference Books 
1. Engel, T. and Reid, P., (2012), Quantum Chemistry and Spectroscopy, 3rd Edition, Pearson  
 
Self Learning Material  
1.Chandra, M., Chemical Applications of Symmetry and Group theory, NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, 
https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc18_ch02/preview 
 
 
 
 
 
583 
 
 
Title Modern Electronic Structure Theory Number CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–3 [4] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite Basic Quantum Chemistry    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide knowledge of modern electronic structure theories and basic computational 
chemistry techniques and tools to carry out electronic structure calculations and interpret 
experimental spectra 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Carry out electronic structure calculations and interpret experimental spectra 
2. Write simple computer programs to carry out calculations 
 
Contents  
Review of basics: Linear algebra, numerical techniques, postulates of quantum mechanics, 
Born-Oppenheimer approximation, concept of potential energy surface, variational and 
perturbation approaches (14 lectures)  
Electronic structure theories: Hartree-Fock (HF) and post-HF theories, Moller-Plesset theory, 
density functional theory, coupled cluster theory, electron correlation, configuration 
interaction, excited states, time dependent density functional theory (14 lectures)  
Techniques: Energy minimization, vibrational frequency analysis, symmetry analysis, zero 
point energy calculation, intrinsic reaction coordinate, distinguishing stationary points, 
atomic charges, Mulliken analysis (14 lectures)  
 
Laboratory Experiments 
Electronic structure calculations; Geometry optimization; simple Fortran programming; 
finding intrinsic reaction coordinates; computing potential and free energy profiles   
 
Textbook 
1. Levine, I. N., (2016), Quantum Chemistry, 7th Edition, Pearson Education 
2. McQuarrie, D. A., (2016), Quantum Chemistry, 2nd Edition, Viva Books 
3. Szabo, A., (1996), Modern Quantum Chemistry, Dover Publications  
 
Reference Books 
1. Jensen, F., (2017), Introduction to Computational Chemistry, 3rd Edition, Wiley-Blackwell 
2.  Cramer, C. J., (2004), Essentials of Computational Chemistry, 2nd Edition, Wiley-
Blackwell 
 
Self Learning Course Material 
1. Simons, J.: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z5cq7JpsG8I 
 
 
 
 
 
584 
 
 
Title Chemical Reaction Dynamics Number CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite Basic Quantum Chemistry    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide introduction to reaction dynamics in the gas phase and many advanced 
concepts in scattering theory.  
2. Compare experimental data with dynamics simulations.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
1. Interpret experimental data in terms of classical and quantum scattering theory 
2. Design and perform advanced dynamics simulations.  
 
Contents  
Reactive collisions: Fundamentals, Potential energy surfaces, Crossed molecular beams, 
state-to-state cross sections, Classical and quantum scattering process (15 lectures)  
Rate theories: Kinetic theory of gases, Transition state theory (TST), Rice-Ramsperger-
Kassel-Marcus (RRKM) theory, Microcanonical and thermal rate constants 
Gas phase dynamics: Photodissociation, energy transfer dynamics, intramolecular vibrational 
energy flow, mode selective chemistry with Lasers (20 lectures) 
Condensed phase dynamics: Solvation, Diffusion, Kramer-Grote-Hynes model, Correlation 
functions (7 lectures)  
 
Textbooks  
1. R. D. Levine, (2009) Molecular Reaction Dynamics, Reprint Edition, Cambridge 
University Press, USA.  
 
Reference Books  
1. T. Baer and W. L. Hase, (1996), Unimolecular Reaction Dynamics: Theory and 
Experiments, Oxford University Press, USA  
2. A. Nitzan, (2006), Chemical Dynamics in Condensed Phases, Oxford University Press, 
USA  
 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. Halder, M., Reaction Dynamics, NPTEL lectures,  Department of Chemistry, Indian 
Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104105041/31 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
585 
 
Title Biophysical Techniques: Theory and 
Applications 
Number CYL3XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Sc/PhD Program, B.Tech Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce basic knowledge of a few biophysical methods and their application in the 
interdisciplinary area of chemistry and biology.  
2. To have a greater understanding of the underlying theory of these methods and their 
practical applications in the laboratories.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Understand the underlying principle of different biophysical methods.  
2. To be able to use important biophysical methods to decipher problems relevant to 
biology.  
3. Better understand the structure-function activity of biomolecules. 
 
Course Content 
Spectroscopic methods: Concepts of spectral transition and analysis of spectrum, Application 
of UV-VIS spectroscopy in protein folding kinetics, Advance topics in fluorescence such as 
anisotropy, resonance energy transfer and real time fluorescence; principle of Circular 
dichroism, optical rotatory dispersion methods and applications, Principle of Surface Plasmon 
Resonance spectroscopy, SPR optical phenomenon, application of SPR in ligand -protein 
interaction. (15 lectures) 
Magnetic Resonance based methods: Principles of NMR and EPR, Concept of relaxation and 
polarization transfer, application of 1D and 2D NMR methods in biomolecules, EPR 
transitions, identification of metal centers in biomolecules, spin labelling and motions of side 
chains. (15 lectures) 
Calorimetric techniques: Principles and applications of Isothermal Titration Calorimetry, 
Differential Scanning Calorimetry, applications in biomolecules. (7 lectures) 
Centrifugation Techniques: Concepts and fundamentals of centrifugation. Ultracentrifugation 
techniques in biology. (5 lectures ) 
Textbook  
1. Cox, M.M, Nelson, D.L., Lehninger (2009) Principles of Biochemistry,  6th Edition, W.H. 
Freeman & Co, 
2. Gunther, H., (1995), NMR Spectroscopy, 2nd Edition, Wiley 
3. Circular Dichroism – Principles and Application, (2000) Edited by Brova, N., Nakanishi, 
K., Woody, R. W., 2nd Ed., Wiley.  
 
Reference Books 
1. Claridge, T. D. W., (1999), High Resolution NMR Techniques in Organic Chemistry, 1st 
Edition, Elsevier 
2. Stryer, L., Berg, J.M., Tymoczko, J.L., (2012) Biochemistry, W.H.Freeman & Co Ltd  
3. Lakowicz, J. R., (2006), Principles of Fluorescence Spectroscopy, 3rd Edition, Springer, 
New York  
 
Self Learning Material  
1. NPTEL lectures: https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc19_cy07/preview 
2. Sharma, K. A., Analytical Technologies in Biotechnology, Dept. of Biotechnology, IIT 
Roorkee, https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc19_cy07/preview 
 
 
 
586 
 
Course Title Stochastic Problems in Biophysics Number CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective    
Pre-requisite  
 
Objectives 
The course will enable: 
1. To understand applications of fundamental probability methods to a wide variety of 
problems related to biophysics. 
2. To show the mathematical literature on this subject 
3. To understand non-equilibrium statistical mechanics 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Ability to translate complex phenomena into simple models  
2. Ability to derive mathematical models for problems related to biophysics 
 
Course Content 
1. Introduction: Historical examples, Joint and conditional Probabilities, Correlation functions 
and Cumulants, Gaussian and Poissonian Probability Distributions (14 lectures)  
2. Markov Processes: Chapman-Kolmogorov Equation, Examples of Markov Processes  (10 
lectures) 
3. Brownian Motion: Basic assumptions, Langevin Equation, Fokker-Planck Equation, Master 
Equations and Jump Processes, Linear Response Theory  (18 lectures) 
  
Text Books 
1. Landau and Lifshitz, Statistical Physics, Elsevier, 2005 
2. David Chandler, Introduction to Modern Statistical Mechanics, Oxford University Press, 1987 
Self Learning Materials 
1. C. W. Gardiner, Handbook of Stochastic Methods for Physics, Chemistry and Natural 
Sciences, Springer-Verlag, 1983 
2. Edited and Introduced by John Stachel, Einstein’s Miraculous Year, Princeton University 
Press, 1998. 
3. S. Chandrashekhar, Reviews of Modern Physics, vol 15, No 1, APS 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Prof. V. Balakrishnan, IIT Madras: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qNmB1qNjZ0k 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
587 
 
Course Title Polymer Dynamics Course No. CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P[C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type  Elective    
Pre-requisite  
 
Objectives 
1. 1. To understand basic principles and theory of  modern macromolecules 
2. 2. To  understand the analogy to other branches of science at a more fundamental level 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Ability to realize that polymers are essential ingredients in biological machinery 
2. Ability to do advanced calculations more modestly 
 
Course Content 
Ideal Chain : Freely joint chain, Flexibility of a polymer chain, Gaussian Chain, Ideal chain as a 
random walk, Ideal polymer by an external force, Flory Calculation (12 lectures)  
Polymer chains with volume interactions and Melts : Models with volume interactions, ideal 
melts, chains in solvents (10 lectures)  
Dynamics: Rouse model, Zimm Model,  Real polymer coil, Reptation model (10 lectures)  
Biopolymers: Properties, Primary structure, Secondary structure, Helix-coil transition (10 
lectures) 
  
Text Books 
1. M. Doi and S. F. Edwards, The Theory of Polymer Dynamics, Oxford Science Publications, 
1990. 
Self Learning Materials 
1. Alexander Yu. Grosberg and Alexei R. Khokhlov,  Statistical Physics of Macromolecules,  AIP 
Press, 1994 
2. Pierre-Gilles de Gennes, Scaling Concepts in Polymer Physics, Cornell University Press, 
1979 
Preparatory Course material 
1. George Phillies lectures a series of graduate classes, based on his book "Phenomenology of 
Polymer Solution Dynamics" Cambridge University Press, 2011. 
2. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mVzrYKkeJzE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
588 
 
Course Title Statistical Mechanics and Molecular 
Simulations 
Course No. CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Pre-requisite  
 
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. To understand the complex soft matter system that bridges the traditional disciplines of 
physics, chemistry and biology using modern theoretical methodology and high-speed 
computers. 
2. To explore the connections between basic statistical mechanical theories and real world 
applications in studying physical, chemical and biological phenomena. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Understanding basic principles of Statistical Mechanics and Molecular Dynamics Simulations. 
2. Mathematical formalism associated with theory and techniques of molecular modelling.  
3. Few real world applications to understand the connections between microscopic and 
macroscopic world. 
 
Course Content 
Statistical basis of thermodynamics:  Introduction to Statistical Methods, Micro and Macro 
states, Ensemble theory (micro-canonical, canonical, isobaric, grand-canonical), Mathematical 
techniques (5 lectures) 
Classical Statistical Mechanics: Partition functions, Thermodynamic functions, Phase space and 
Liouville equation, Distribution functions, Kirkwood integrals (10 lectures).  
(Module 3 of ``Statistical Physics” by Physics department) Fluctuations: Thermodynamic 
fluctuations, Spatial correlations in a fluid, Einstein-Smoluchowski theory of Brownian motion, 
Langevin theory,Fokker-Planck equation, Fluctuation-dissipation theory, Onsager relations (12 
lectures) 
Introduction to Molecular Modeling: Algorithms, Periodic boundary conditions, Interaction 
functions and force fields, Electrostatics, Molecular dynamics in various ensembles (10 lectures)  
 Applications: Brownian dynamics simulations, Biological applications for proteins and 
membranes (5 lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. Mark E Tuckerman, Statistical Mechanics and Molecular Simulations, Oxford University, 
2010 
2. David Chandler, Introduction to Modern Statistical Mechanics, Oxford University Press, 
1987  
Self Learning Material 
1. M. P. Allen and T J Tildesley, Computer Simulations of Liquids, Oxford Science Publications, 
1993 
2. D. A. Mcquarrie, Statistical Mechanics, University Science Books, 2000 
3. D. Frenkel and B. Smit, Understanding Molecular Dynamics Simulations, Academic press, 
2002 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/mechanical-engineering/2-57-nano-to-macro-transport-
processes-spring-2012/ 
 
 
 
  
589 
 
 
Course Title Advanced Electrochemistry and 
Applications 
Number CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Pre-requisite  
 
Objectives 
The instructor will 
1. Provide an introductory but thorough background in electrochemistry. 
2. Provide fundamentals of electrochemical systems, electroanalytical techniques and 
advanced applications. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. describe the difference between equilibrium properties and properties of electrochemical 
systems and apply electrochemical methods for required information. 
2. explain the functioning of electrochemical devices as well as the commonly employed 
underlying electrochemical reactions 
 
 Contents 
Introduction to Electrochemistry: Nernst equation, electrode kinetics, dynamic 
electrochemistry, the Butler-Volmer and Tafel equations. Overpotentials. Kinetically and 
mass transport controlled electrochemical processes. Mass transport by migration, 
convection and diffusion. Conductivity. (Lectures 7) 
Electrochemical Methods: Potentiostatic and galvanostatic electrochemical methods including 
chronoamperometry, coulometry, cyclic voltammetry, chronopotentiometry, ac impedance 
spectroscopy, spectroelectrochemistry and hydrodynamic methods.(Lectures 8)  
Solid state electrochemistry. Ion conducting and electronically conducting polymers; The 
electrochemical double layer. (5 Lectures) 
Surface confined electrochemical processes: The fundamentals of corrosion. Homogeneous 
and heterogeneous electrocatalysis (HER and OER). Electrochemical processes coupled to 
chemical steps. Nanostructured and surface modified electrodes. (8 Lectures) 
Application: Introduction to batteries, fuel cells and electrochemical solar cells. (7 Lectures) 
Electrochemical processes of particular relevance to energy conversion.(5 Lectures)  
 
Text Books 
1. D. I. Antropov, Theoretical Electrochemistry, Mir Publishers, 1972. 
2. J. M. Bockris and A. K. N. Reddy, Modern Electrochemistry, Vol.1 and 2, Plenum Press, 1998.  
3. Industrial Electrochemistry, 2nd ed, Pletcher, Derek/Walsh, Frank C., London: Chapman and 
Hall, 1990 
4. Electrochemistry for Chemists, 2nd ed, Sawyer, Donald T./Sobkowiak, Andrej/Roberts, Julian 
L., New York: John Wiley, 1995 
 
Reference Books 
1. Transient Techniques in Electrochemistry, Macdonald, Digby D., New York: Plenum Press, 
1977  
2. Laboratory Techniques in Electroanalytical Chemistry, (2nd edition) by Peter Kissinger 
and William Heineman (Marcell Dekker) 1996 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. NPTEL material: https://nptel.ac.in/courses/104106105/ 
 
 
 
590 
 
 
 
Course Title Hands On -1 Course No. CYP6XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 0-0-3 [1.5] 
Offered for M.Sc. (CY) Program Type Compulsory  
Pre-requisite   
 
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. Provide the students hands-on training using the available characterization tools .  
2. Provide students with the knowledge and skills needed to conduct laboratory research, 
understand instrument design and analyze instrumental results. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Clear understanding of different analytical instruments.  
2. Experimental verification of fundamental concept 
3. Application of spectroscopic techniques as analytical tool in chemistry.  
 
Contents 
1. NMR Working principles and instrumentation 
2. Single Crystal X-Ray Diffraction  Working principles and instrumentation 
3. Electroanalytical Methods (Ampereometry, Cyclic Voltametry, EIS spectroscopy etc) 
4. SEM Working principles and instrumentation 
5. AFM Working principles and instrumentation 
6. UV-Vis Working principles and instrumentation 
7. IR Working principles and instrumentation 
8. TGA/DSC Working principles and instrumentation 
9. BET Surface Area Analyser Working principles and instrumentation 
10. PXRD Working principles and instrumentation 
 
Text Books 
1. Halpern, A. M.; McBane, G. C. Experimental Physical Chemistry: A laboratory Text 
Book, 3rd ed. W. H. Freeman, 2006.  
 
 Reference Book:  
1. Literature References from ACS Chemical Education 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
591 
 
 
Course Title Hands on -2 Course No. CYP6XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 0-0-3 [1.5] 
Offered for M.Sc. (CY) Program Type Compulsory  
Pre-requisite   
 
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. Provide the students hands-on training using the available characterization tools .  
2. Provide students with the knowledge and skills needed to conduct laboratory research, 
understand instrument design and analyze instrumental results. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Have clear understanding of different analytical instruments.  
2. Experimental verification of fundamental concept 
3. Application of spectroscopic techniques as analytical tool in chemistry. 
  
Course Content 
1. Chromatographic Techniques (GC and HPLC) in Organic Analysis 
2. Fluorescence Spectroscopy and its application 
3. Synthesis techniques and laboratory practices  
4. OriginPro Data Analysis and Plotting of graphs 
5. MERCURY and ENCIFER Crystal structure viewing 
6. MATLAB for data analysis: basic plotting techniques; curve fitting; and simple linear 
programming;  
7. Chem Draw for drawing molecular structures 
8. Mathematica for mathematical data handling 
9. Technical communication - presentation, literature search 
10. Scifinder for literature search 
11. Analysis and identification of organic compounds by 1H NMR, Mass spectrometry and IR  
12. Modeling of intermediate and transition state of organic reactions 
 
Text Books: 
1. Halpern, A. M.; McBane, G. C. Experimental Physical Chemistry: A laboratory Text Book, 
3rd ed. W. H. Freeman, 2006. 
 
Reference Book:  
1. Hunt, B. R. et al., A guide to MATLAB: For beginners and experienced user, 2nd Edition, 
University Press, Cambridge, 2006 
2. ChemDraw user guide: http://media.cambridgesoft.com/support/15/ChemDrawHelp.pdf 
3. McMahon, D, A & Topa, D. M., A beginners guide to Mathematica, Chapman & Hall/CRC, 
2006.   
 
 
 
 
592 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Master of Science (MSc) Program  
in  
Mathematics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
593 
 
 
(1) Introduction: 
The classical mathematics provides foundations for analysis of key principles behind 
modern and emergent technologies, modern mathematics coupled with computational 
capabilities is opening new avenues for further explorations. M. Sc. (Mathematics) 
Program at IIT Jodhpur aims at tapping these opportunities by developing workforce 
specialized in mathematics needed for developing key technologies. The proposed four 
semester program strives to provide balance between analysis and appli cation of 
Mathematics. The compulsory courses provide the basic understanding and foundation of 
mathematics enhancing analytic capabilities of the students. Students can further 
explore their area of interest with program and open elective courses. The pro ject 
component spread over last two semesters provides research exposure to the students 
and provides an opportunity to apply their mathematical skills to solve real -life 
problems. Students are encouraged to undertake research Summer Internships in 
Institute of repute, Industry and R&D organizations. 
 
(2) Objectives of the Program: 
M.Sc. program in Mathematics at IIT Jodhpur is offered with the objective of tapping 
opportunities for nurturing motivated students in the frontline areas and well trained 
workforce for Academia and Industry. The Program also strives to provide a vibrant 
environment to support independent thinking and developing the spirit of team work. 
 
(3) Expected Graduate Attributes: 
(1) Skill set to analyze abstract mathematical structures. 
(2) Understanding about the recent areas in pure and applied mathematics such as 
algebra, analysis, statistics and computation. 
(3) Ability to formulate mathematics from computational aspect.  
(4) Knowledge and capability to develop and apply mathematical models for real life 
problems. 
(5) Skill set to understand the abstraction of mathematical structures. 
(6) Analytical and scientific skill set to pursue higher studies and research in diverse 
areas of mathematics. 
(7) Ability to express ideas in the written and oral formats. 
 
(4) Learning Outcomes: 
(1) Understanding of fundamental aspects of real, complex and functional analysis. 
(2) Basic understanding of linear and abstract algebra. 
(3) Knowledge about basics and use of probability theory, statistics and differential 
equations. 
(4) Skill set to cater computational aspects using programming techniques. 
(5) Basic understanding of symbolic solution tools such as MATLAB or Mathematica. 
(6) Demonstrate skills to communicate scientific ideas and/or application systems.  
594 
 
(7) Acquire project management skills. 
(5) Program Structure: 
 
Cat. Course 
Number 
Course Title L-T-P-
D 
Credits  Cat. Course 
Number 
Course Title L-T-P-
D 
Credits 
Semester 1  Semester 2 
C MAL6XX0 Linear 
algebra 
3-0-0-
1 
4  C MAL6XX0 Abstract 
Algebra 
3-0-0-1 4 
C MAL6XX0 Real analysis 3-0-0-
1 
4  C MAL5XX0 Complex  
Analysis 
3-0-0-1 4 
C MAL6XX0 Ordinary 
Differential 
equations 
3-0-0-
1 
4  C MAL6XX0 Partial 
Differential 
equations 
3-0-0-0 3 
C MAL5XX0 Probability 
and 
Statistics 
3-0-0-
1 
4  C MAL6XX0 Functional 
analysis 
3-0-0-0 3 
C MAL5XX0 Programming 
Techniques 
2-0-2-
0 
3  PE Xxxxx PE1 3-0-0-0 3 
      C MA5XX0 Data 
Structures and 
Algorithms 
1-0-2-0 2 
Total 19  Total 19 
 
Semester 3  Semester 4 
C MAL6XX0 Topology 3-0-0-
0 
3  PE Xxxxx PE5 3-0-0-0 3 
PE Xxxxx PE2 3-0-0-
0 
3  PE Xxxxx PE6 3-0-0-0 3 
PE Xxxxx PE3 3-0-0-
0 
3  OE Xxxxx OE2 3-0-0-0 3 
PE Xxxxx PE4 3-0-0-
0 
3       
OE Xxxxx OE1 3-0-0-
0 
3       
P MAP7XX0   Project 0-0-
0-5 
5  P MAP7XX0   Project 0-0-
0-10 
10 
Total 20  Total 19 
Grand total 77 
 
S.No. Category Course 
Category Title 
Total 
Courses 
Total 
Credits 
1 C Compulsory 11 38 
2 PE Program Electives 6 18 
3 OE Open Elective 2 6 
4 P Project 2 15 
Total  77 
 
 
 
(6) Topic Cloud 
Compulsory Topics: 
(a) Linear Algebra (Finite dimensional Vector Spaces, linear transformations, Inner 
Product Spaces, Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors, Jordan canonical forms, Matrix 
theory, Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors, Spectral Analysis) 
595 
 
(b) Real Analysis (Basic properties of real system, study of Metric spaces, Calculus of 
several variables, Function spaces), Abstract Algebra (Basic algebraic structures, 
group theory, ring theory, Galois Theory) 
(c) Topology (Topological structures and their properties, transformation between 
topological spaces), Functional Analysis (Normed linear spaces, Banach spaces, Lp 
Spaces, Hilbert Spaces, Linear transformations and their properties) 
(d) Complex Analysis (Fundamental theorem of Complex Analysis, Residue theorem, 
Contour integration and its applications, evaluation of Improper integrals, conformal 
mappings) 
(e) Probability theory (Univariate and multi -variate Probability Distributions and their 
properties, weak laws of large numbers, central limit theorem). 
(f) Statistics (sampling distributions, estimation of parameters, interval estimation, 
testing of hypotheses), Statistical modelling (Estimation of par ameters, Interval 
estimation, Testing of hypotheses) 
(g) Ordinary Differential Equations (Existence and Uniqueness of solution, Sturm-
Liouville problems and properties of its solutions) 
(h) Partial differential equations and their applications 
(i) Fundamentals of Programming 
(j) Numerical Techniques (Root finding methods, Solution for system of linear 
equations, Power method), Solution to System of linear Equations, Interpolation, 
Numerical solution of Ordinary Differential Equations. 
 
Elective Topics: 
Fourier analysis, Wavelets analysis, Dynamical Systems, Operations Research, Number 
Theory, Calculus of Variations, Integral Equations, Statistical Inference, Graphs Theory, 
Stochastic Calculus, Measure and Integration, Chaos Theory, Numerical Methods for 
Partial Differential Equations, Discrete Mathematics. 
 
 
 
(7) List of Electives 
 
(a) Department of Mathematics 
 MAL7XX0: Measure and Integration 
 MAL7XX0: Financial Engineering 
 MAL7XX0: Wavelets analysis and Applications   
 MAL7XX0: Dynamical Systems 
 MAL7XX0: Optimization 
 MAL7XX0: Numerical Analysis 
 MAL7XX0: Number Theory 
 MAL7XX0: Statistical Inference 
 MAL7XX0: Graph Theory 
 MAL7XX0: Calculus of Variation and Integral Equations 
 MAL7XX0: Stochastic Calculus  
 MAL7XX0: Algebraic Number Theory 
 MAL7XX0: Machine Learning and Pattern Recognition 
 MAL7XX0: Chaos Theory and its Applications 
 MAL7XX0: Representations of finite groups 
 MAL8XX0: Numerical Partial Differential Equations 
 MAL7XX0: Selected Topics in Mathematics - I (1-0-0-0) 
 MAL7XX0: Selected Topics in Mathematics - II (2-0-0-0) 
 MAL7XX0: Selected Topics in Mathematics - III (3-0-0-0) 
596 
 
 
(b) From sister Departments 
 Theory of Vibrations 
 Finite Element Methods in Engineering 
 Incompressible Fluid Flow 
 Computer Graphics 
 Advanced Computer Graphics 
 Digital Image Analysis 
 Statistical Signal Analysis 
 Statistical Decision Theory 
 Computational Imaging 
 Multimedia Communication 
 Classical Mechanics 
 Quantum Mechanics 
 Statistical Physics 
 Introduction to Quantum Technologies 
  
597 
 
(8) Content of compulsory courses: 
 
Course Title Linear Algebra Course No. MAL6XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-1[4] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
1. To give sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by students for 
further applications in their respective domains of interest. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Concept of linear spaces, mapping between spaces, norm and their action on 
spaces. 
2. Eigenvalues, eigenvectors and diagonalization, and Primary decomposition 
theorem. 
3. Normal operators and Spectral theory of real symmetric normal operators. 
 
Contents 
Vector Spaces, Matrices and System of Linear Equations [10 Lectures] : System of 
linear equations, Matrices and rank, Vector Spaces over fields, Subspaces, Bases and 
dimension, Direct sum of the sub spaces. 
 
Linear Transformation and Inner Product Spaces [10 Lectures] : Linear 
Transformations, Rank and Nullity theorem, Representation of linear transformations 
by matrices, duality and transpose. Inner product spaces, Gram -Schmidt 
orthonormalization, orthogonal projections. 
 
Operators and Spectral Theorem [20 Lectures] : Linear functionals and adjoints, 
Hermitian, self -adjoint, Unitary and normal operators, Spectral theorem for real 
operators, Eigenvalues, Eigenvectors, Characteristic polynomials, minimal polynomia ls, 
Cayley Hamilton Theorem, triangulation, diagonalization, Jordan canonical forms 
(without proof). 
 
Textbook  
1. Hoffman, K., and Kunze R., Linear Algebra,  Pearson Education (India) 2003. 
2. Herstein, I.N., Topics in Algebra, 2nd Edn., John Wiley and Sons. 
3. Lax, P., Linear Algebra and its applications, John Wiley & Sons, Indian Edition 1997 
4. Lang, S., Linear Algebra, 3rd Edition, Springer, 2004. 
 
Reference Books  
1. Artin, M., Algebra, Prentice Hall of India, 1994. 
2. Axler, S., (1997), Linear Algebra Done Right. 
3. Kumaresan, S., (2000) Linear Algebra – A Geometric Approach, PHI Learning. 
4. Sharma, R. K., Shah, S. K. and Shankar, A. G., Algebra I: A Basic Course in 
Algebra, Pearson Education, 2011. 
 
Online course Material  
1. Rana, I.K., Basic Linear Algebra, NPTEL Course material, Department of 
Mathematics, IIT Bombay,  https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111101115/  
 
 
 
 
 
598 
 
Course Title Real Analysis Course No. MAL6XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-1[4] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
1. To train the student in the area of real analysis 
2. To give sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by student for 
further applications in their respective domains of interest 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Metric spaces, completeness and Baire Category. 
2. Continuity, Uniform continuity, Contraction mapping, fixed point theorem.  
3. Connectedness and Compactness and Heine-Borel theorem. 
4. Function spaces, Weiestrass approximation theorem. 
 
Contents 
Real Number System, Limits and Continuity  [10 Lectures]:  Countable and uncountable 
sets, the axiom of choice, Zorn‟s lemma, Real number system, Consequences of 
completeness property, limit and continuity of functions, uniform continuity.   
Metric Spaces [10 Lectures] : Metric spaces, continuous and uniformly co ntinuous 
functions, bounded and totally bounded sets, Compactness, Heine -Borel Theorem, 
Completeness, Cantor‟s Intersection theorem, Baire spaces, Connectedness.  
Sequences and Series of Functions: [10 Lectures]  Sequences and Series of functions, 
Uniform convergence, Uniform convergence and integration, Uniform convergence and 
differentiation,  
Multivariable Calculus [10 Lectures] : Functions of several variables, continuity, 
differentiability, partial derivatives, Jacobian, Inverse Function Theorem and the Implicit 
Function Theorem, multivariable integration, Fubini‟s theorem, Change of variables, Line 
integrals, surface integrals, Green‟s theorem, Divergence theorem, Stokes theorem, and 
applications. 
 
Textbook 
1. Aliprantis, C.D., and Burkinshaw, O., Principles of Real Analysis, 3rd Edition. 
2. Apostol, T., Mathematical Analysis, 2nd Edition, Narosa, 2002. 
3. Ghorpade, S.R., and Limaye, B.V., A Course in Multivariable Calculus and Analysis, 
Springer. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Royden, H. L., Real Analysis, Third Edition, Macmillan Publishing Company, 1988. 
2. Rudin, W., Priciples of Mathematical Analysis, Third Edition, McGraw-Hill, 1976. 
3. Davidson, K. R., and Donsig, A. P., Real analysis and applications: Theory in 
practice, Springer Publications, 2010. 
4. Bartle, R., Sherbert, D., Introduction to Real Analysis, 3rd Edition, Wiley 2011. 
 
Online course Material  
1. Kulkarni, S.H., Real Analysis, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mathematics, 
IIT Madras,  https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111106053/    
 
 
 
 
 
599 
 
Course Title Ordinary Differential Equations Course No. MAL6XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-1[4] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
1. Introduce the concepts of existence and uniqueness of solution of ordinary 
differential equations 
2. Develop analytical techniques to solve ordinary differential equations 
3. Understand the properties of solution of ordinary differential equations  
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Understanding existence, uniqueness, and other properties of a solution of 
ordinary differential equations 
2. Solving ordinary differential equations with series method, Green's function 
method 
3. Solving systems of ODEs, and characterization of their solutions 
 
Contents 
Motivations and origins, Existence-Uniqueness [7 Lectures]: Existence of solutions by 
Picard‟s method, uniqueness and continuous dependence w.r.t. initial conditions and 
parameters, continuation of solutions, existence  and uniqueness of solutions to 
system of differential equations. 
 
Second Order Linear Equations [23 Lectures] : General solution of differential 
equations using method of undetermined coefficients, method of variation of 
parameters, variable coefficients equations, Power series solution method, Legendre‟s 
equation, Frobenius method, Bessel‟s equation, Green's function method, Sturm -
Liouville problems, orthogonal eigen -function expansions, Sturm comparison theorem, 
Sturm separation theorem, 
 
Systems of Differential Equations [10 Lectures]: Phase plane method, critical points of 
the system and their stability analysis, algebraic properties of solutions, the 
eigenvalue-eigenvector method of finding solutions, fundamental matrix solutions, 
matrix exponential, nonhomogeneous equations. 
 
Text Books 
1. Ross, S. L., Introduction to ordinary differential equations, 4th Ed., John Wiley 
Publications, 1989 
2. Braun. M., Differential Equations and Their Applications, 3rd  Ed., Springer-Verlag, 
1983 
3. Chicone, C., Ordinary Differential Equations with Applications, 2nd  Ed., Springer, 
2006 
 
Reference Books 
1. Coddington, E. A., An Introduction to Ordinary Differential Equations, PHI 
Learning 1999 
2. Birkhoff, G. and Rota G., Ordinary Differential Equations, 4th Ed., Wiley 
Publications, 1989 
3. Simmons, G., Differential Equations with Applications and Historical Notes, 2nd 
Ed., McGraw Hill Education, 2017 
 
Online Course Material  
1. Agrawal, P. N. and Pandey, D. N., Ordinary and partial differential equations and 
applications, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mathematics, IIT Roorkee, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107111/    
600 
 
2. Raghavendra V., Ordinary differential equations, NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Mathematics, IIT Kanpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111104031/ 
 
 
 
  
601 
 
Course Title Probability and Statistics Course No. MAL5XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-1[4] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
1. Demonstrate an understanding of the basic principles of probability theory. 
2. Use of the properties of discrete and continuous random variables with their 
joint, marginal, and conditional distributions. 
3. Use of the various families of probability distributions to model vari ous types of 
data. 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Understanding of probability theory and statistics to solve industrial problems. 
2. Understanding of random sampling, theory of estimation and testing of 
hypotheses. 
 
Contents: 
Probability spaces and Random Variables  [15 lectures]: Probability measure, 
conditional probability, Bayes‟ theorem, Random variable, cumulative distribution 
function and its properties, probability density function, functions of a random 
variable, standard discrete and continuous distributions and their applications, 
Transformation, moments, Chebychev‟s inequality. 
Joint Distributions  [10 lectures] : Random vectors, joint, marginal and conditional 
distributions, conditional expectation, independence, correlation and regression, Bi -
variate normal distribution, functions of random vectors, transformation. 
Limit Theorems  [3 lectures] : Convergence of sequences of random variables, weak 
and strong laws of large numbers, central limit theorems. 
Estimation and Tests of Hypotheses  [14 lectures]: Sampling distributions, estimation 
of parameters, maximum likelihood method and method of moments, interval 
estimation, testing of hypotheses. 
 
Text Books 
1. Rohatgi, V. K., and Saleh, A. K. M. E., An Introduction to Probability and 
Statistics, Second Edition, Wiley India, 2000. 
2. Casella, G. and Berger, R. (2002). Statistical Inference, Cengage Learning. 
3. Hoel, P.G., Port, S.C. and Stone, C.J. (1971). Introduction to Probability Theory, 
Houghton Mifflin Series in Statistics. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Hogg, R. V., McKean J. W., and Craig A., Introduction to Mathematical Statistics, 
Sixth Edition, Pearson Education India, 2006. 
2. Prakasa Rao, B. L., S., A First Course in Probability and Statistics, World 
Scientific/Cambridge University Press India, 2009. 
3. Castaneda, L. B., Arunachala m, V., and Dharmaraja, S., Introduction to 
probability and stochastic processes with Applications. Wiley, 2012 
 
Online Course Material: 
1. Kumar, S., Probability and Statistics, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Mathematics, IIT Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111105090/ 
 
 
 
 
602 
 
Title Programing techniques Number MAL5XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 2–0–2-0 
[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. introduce the basics of computer programming in C/C++. 
2. Teach to develop well-structured programs in C/C++. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Write well structures programs in C/C++. 
2. Implement and solve algebraic and transcendental equations and system of 
equations numerically. 
Contents  
  
  
  
Introduction [2 Lectures] : machine language, assembly language, high -level 
programming languages, compiler, interpreter, loader, linker, and flowchart. 
 
Basic featu res of programming (Using C/C++) [8 Lectures] : Data types, variables, 
operators, expressions, control structures, functions, parameter passing conventions.  
 
Advanced features of programming [8 Lectures] : Pointers, arrays, operations on data 
(Insert, delete, search, traverse and modify), structures, introduction to classes. 
 
Root finding methods [4 Lectures] : Bisection method, Secant method, the method of 
false position, Newton-Raphson method. 
 
Solution of system of linear equations [6 Lectures] : Gauss elimi nation, Gauss -Jordan 
method, LU decomposition, Crout's Method, Do -little Method, and Cholesky 
decomposition. 
 
Textbooks  
1. Balaguruswamy, E., Programming in ANSI C, Tata McGraw-Hill, 2004. 
2. Lafore, R., Object-Oriented  Programming in C++, Fourth Edition, Pearson, 2002. 
3. Burden,  R. L., Numerical Analysis, Ninth Edition, Cengage Learning India, 2012. 
Reference Books  
1. Schildt, H., C: The Complete Reference, Fourth Edition, Tata McGraw Hill, 2000. 
2. Datta,  B. N., Numerical Linear Algebra and Applications, 2nd Edition, PHI, 2010. 
Online Course Material  
1. Kumar, S.A., Principles of Programming Languages, NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Delhi, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106102067/.   
2. Gupta, D., Introduction to Problem Sol ving and Programming, NPTEL Course 
Material, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Kanpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106104074/. 
3. Nayak,  A. K. and Kumar S., Numerical methods, NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Mathematics, IIT Roorkee, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107105/. 
 
 
 
603 
 
Course Title Abstract Algebra Course No. MAL6XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-1[4] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
1. To train the student in the domain of Abstract Algebra. 
2. To give sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by student for 
further applications in their respective domains of interest.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Modules, Dual modules, Cyclic Primary modules and Decomposition theorem. 
2. Nilpotent and Solvable groups, Galois Theory, splitting Fields, Normal extension, 
Fundamental theorem of Galois theory  
 
Contents: 
 
Group Theory [10 lectures]:  Review of Group theory (Symmetric Groups, 
Transformation Groups), Abelian groups, Sylow Theorems, nilpotent and solvable 
groups. 
 
Ring Theory [11 lectures] : Rings, Polynomial Rings, Prime ideals, Maximal Ideals, 
Principal Ideal Domain, Unique Factorization domain, Euclidian Algorithm.  
 
Field extensions [5 lectures]: Finite extension, algebraic extensions. 
 
Galois Theory [16 lectures] : Galois Theory, splittin g Fields, Normal extension, 
Fundamental Theorem of Galois Theory and its applications. 
 
 
Text Book 
1. Cohn, P. M., Basic algebra: Groups, rings and fields, 2 Ed., Springer, 2005 
2. Jacobson, N., Basic Algebra I, Dover Publication, 2009 
3. Jacobson, N., Basic Algebra II, Dover Publication, 2012 
 
Reference Books 
1. Artin, M., Algebra, Second Edition, Pearson, 2010 
4. Dummit, D. S. and Foote, R. M., Abstract algebra, 3 Ed., Wiley, 2004 
5. Stewart, I., Galois Theory, Third Edition, Chapman and Hall, 2003 
 
Online Course Material: 
1. Gross, B., Abstract Algebra, Online Course Material, Harvard Extension School, 
http://matterhorn.dce.harvard.edu/engage/ui/index.html#/1999/01/82345 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
604 
 
Course Title Complex Analysis Course No. MAL5XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-1[4] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
1. To train the student in the area of complex analysis. 
2. To give sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by student for 
further applications in their respective domains of interest. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Cauchy-Riemann Equations, Homotopy of paths. 
2. Cauchy-Goursat theorem and Cauchy‟s Integral Formula. 
3. Evaluation of improper integrals. 
 
Contents 
 
Introduction to functions of complex variables  [14 Lectures] : Elementary functions, 
continuity, differentiability, Analytic Functions, Cauchy Riemann Equations. 
 
Complex Integration [14 Lectures]: Line and Contour Integrals, anti -derivatives of a  
complex function, Cauchy-Goursat Theorem, Simply and multiply connected domains, 
Cauchy‟s Integral formula, Taylor and Laurent Series expansion, Liouville‟s Theorem, 
Fundamental Theorem of Algebra, Maximum modulus principle. 
 
Residue Theory [10 Lectures] Residues and poles, Cauchy‟s residue theorem, Jordan‟s 
Theorem, evaluation of Improper integrals 
 
Conformal mappings  [4 Lectures] : Conformal mapping, Special transformation, 
Mobious transformation. 
 
Text Books 
1. Lang, S., Complex Analysis, Fourth Edition, Springer-Verlag, 1999 
2. Brown, J. W. and Churchill, R. V., Complex variables and applications, 9 Ed., 
McGraw Hill Publications, 2013 
 
Reference Books 
1. Ahlfors, L.V., Complex Analysis, 3rd edition, McGraw Hill, 2000. 
2. Ablowitz, M. J., and Fokas, A. S., Complex variables: Introduction and 
applications, 2 Ed., Cambridge University Press, 2003. 
3. Shastri, A.R., An Introduction to Complex Analysis, Macmillan India, New Delhi, 
1999. 
 
Online Resources 
1. Sree Krishna, P.A.S., Complex Analysis, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Mathematics, IIT Guwahati,  https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111103070/ 
2. Swaminathan, A. and Katiyar, V.K. Complex Analysis, NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Mathematics, IIT Roorkee,  
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107056/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
605 
 
Course Title Partial Differential 
Equations 
Course No. MAL6XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
1. Introduce the concepts of existence and uniqueness of solution of partial differential 
equations 
2. Develop analytical techniques to solve partial differential equations 
3. Understand the properties of solution of partial differential equations  
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Understanding existence, uniqueness, and other properties of a solution of partial 
differential equations 
2. Solving partial differential equations with Fourier series method, Green's function 
method,  Laplace transform method, and Fourier transform method 
 
Contents 
 
Motivations and origins [3 Lectures]:  PDEs of engineering and physics (Heat, wave and 
Laplace equations). 
  
First order partial differential equations [9 Lectures] : Linear, quasi -linear and fully 
nonlinear equations, Lagrange method, the Cauchy problem, Cauchy method of 
characteristics, compatible systems, Charpit method.  
 
Second order partial differential equations [12 Lectures] : Classification and Canonical 
forms, Adjoint operators, Riemann‟s method, solving linear partial differential equations 
with constant coefficients. 
 
Elliptic, parabolic and hyperbolic equations[16 Lectures]: Variable separation method for 
Laplace/Poisson equation, heat conduction equation, wave equation, Burger equation,  
D‟Alembert‟s solution,  Maximum -Minimum principles, Duhamel‟s principle, solutions by 
Green‟s function method. 
 
Text Books 
1. Rao, K. S., Introduction to partial differential equations, 3rd Edition, PHI, 2011 
2. Logan, J. D., Applied partial differential equations, 3rd  Ed., Springer, 2015 
3. Pinchover, Y. and Rubinstein, J., An introduction to partial differential equations, 
Cambridge University Press, 2005 
 
Reference Books 
1. Sneddon, I. N., Elements of Partial Differential Equations, McGraw-Hill, New 
York,1986 
2. Prasad, P. And Ravindran, R.,  Partial differential equations, New Age 
International Publisher, 2005 
3. Mattheij, R. M. M., Rienstra, S. W., and ten Thije Boonkkamp, J. H. M., Partial 
Differential Equations: Modeling, Analysis, Computation, SIAM Publication, 2005 
 
Online Course Material  
1. Agrawal, P. N. and Pandey D.N., Ordinary and partial differential equations and 
applications, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mathematics, IIT Roorkee, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107111/ 
2. Sinha, R. K., Partial differential equations, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Mathematics, IIT Guwahati, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111103021/ 
606 
 
Title Functional Analysis Number MAL6XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 
[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
1. To introduce the area of Functional analysis. 
2. To give sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by student for further 
applications in their respective domains of interest. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. Basic idea of a normed linear spaces and operators on normed linear space. 
2. Open Mapping theorem, Hahn-Banach Theorem and their applications. 
 
Contents  
Normed Linear Spaces [14 Lectures]: Normed linear space, subspace of a normed linear 
space, Equivalent norms, Finite Dimensional normed linear spaces, Banach spaces, 
Linear operator, norm of a linear operator, boundedness and continuity, Quotient spaces.  
 
Integrability and Extensi on Theorems  [19 Lectures] : Integrable functions, l_p spaces, 
Minkowski's inequality, Holder's inequality, separability of l_p spaces, uniformly bounded 
operator, principle of uniform boundedness, Sub -linear functional, Semi -norm, Open 
mapping theorem, Clos ed graph theorem, Hahn -Banach Theorem, dual of a normed 
linear space, reflexive normed linear space. 
 
Hilbert Spaces and their Applications [9 Lectures]: Inner product spaces, polarisation 
identity, Bessel's inequality, Hilbert space, Riesz representation theorem, Operators on 
Hilbert spaces, compact operators, projections and idempotents.  
 
Text Books  
1. Limaye, B. V., Functional Analysis, Second Edition, New Age International, 1996 
2. Lax, P. D., Functional Analysis, First Edition, 2001 
3. Ruddin, W., Functional Analysis, 2nd Ed., McGraw Hill Education, 2017 
 
Reference Books  
1. Conway, J. B., A course in Functional Analysis, Second Edition, Springer -Verlag, 
1994 
2. Goffman, C., and Pedrick, G., A First Course in Functional Analysis, Prentice -Hall, 
1974 
 
Online Course Material  
1. Srivastava, P. D., Functional Analysis,  NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Mathematics, IIT Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/111105037/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
607 
 
Course Title Data Structures and Algorithms Course No. MAP5XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 1–0–2-0 [2] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
1. To provide sufficient skills to prove and analyze efficiency of the algorithms.  
2. To introduce elementary data structures and related operations. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Ability to design correct programs to solve problems.  
2. Skills to choose efficient data structures and apply them to solve problems. 
3.  Ability to show the correctness and efficiency of a program. 
 
 
Contents 
 
Performance of algorithms  [3 lectures]: Algorithm Development, Complexity analysis 
and asymptotics.  
 
Data structures [11 lectures] : Arrays, pointers, linked lists, stacks, queues, b inary 
trees, tree traversals.  
 
A programming laboratory will be set in consonance with the topics covered in 
lectures. This will include assignments in a programming language like C and C++ in 
GNU Linux environment. 
 
 
Text Books 
1. Cormen, T.H., Leiserson, C.E., Rivest, R.L. and Stein, C., Introduction to 
Algorithms, 2nd Ed.,Prentice-Hall of India, 2007. 
2. Sahni, S., Data Structures, Algorithms and Applications in C++, 2nd Ed., 
Universities Press, 2005. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Aho, A. V., Ullman, J. D., and Hopcroft, J. E. (1985), Data Structures and 
Algorithms, Addison-Wesley.  
2. Goodrich, M.T. and Tamassia, R., Data Structures and Algorithms in Java, Wiley, 
2006. 
 
Online course material 
1. Garg, N., Data Structures And Algorithms, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Delhi, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106102064/. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
608 
 
Title Topology Number MAL6XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 
[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
1. To train the students in the domain of Topology. 
2. To give sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by student for further 
applications in their respective domains of interest. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. Topological spaces, order topology and product topology. 
2. Separation axioms, countability axioms Urysohn‟s metrization theorem. 
3. Function spaces, pointwise and uniform convergence, Stone-Weierstrass Theorem.  
 
Contents  
 
Basic Topology [14 Lectures]: Topological spaces, basis and sub -basis, order topology, 
product topology, subspace topology, convergence, closed sets, continuous functions, 
quotient topology  
 
Properties of Topological Spaces [17 Lectures]: Connected spaces, Components, local 
connectedness, compact spaces, limit point compactness, local compactness, 
Countability axioms, separation axioms, normal spaces, Tychonoff spaces, Urysohn‟s 
metrization theorem, Tietze extension theorem, Tychonoff theorem, Stone-Cech 
compactification 
 
Special Topics [09 Lectures] : Function spaces, pointwise and uniform convergence, 
compact-open topology, uniform convergence on compact set, Stone -Weierstrass 
Theorem. 
 
 
Text Books  
1. Munkres, J., Topology, second edition, Pearson Publications, 2000 
2. Willard, S., General Topology, Dover Publications, 2004 
 
Reference Books  
1. Pervin, W. J. and Boas, R. P., Foundations of general topology, Academic Press, 
1964 
2. Simmons, G. F., Introdunction to topology and modern analysis, Tata McGraw-
Hill, 2004 
 
Online Course Material  
1. Veeramani, P., Topology, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mathematics, IIT  
Madras, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111106054/. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
609 
 
(9) Content of Elective courses: 
 
Title Measure and Integration Number MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D 
[C] 
3–0–0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
1. Provide background in the area of Measure Theory. 
2. Provide sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by students for 
further applications in their respective domains of interest. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
1.  Provide basic understanding of the measures, total variation, absolute continuity, 
and Radon-Nikodym Theorem. 
2.  Impart knowledge in Derivatives of measures, Fundamental Theorem, product 
measures, Fubini‟s Theorem, convolutions, Distribution functions. 
 
Contents  
 
Basics of Measure and Integration [12 Lectures] : Riemann Integration and need for 
generalization, Measurable Sets, measurable functions, functions between measurable 
spaces, Measures on Algebra of Sets, Extension Theorems, Lebesgue and Lebesgue -
Stieltjes measure, Measure, measure spaces. 
 
Integrability [14 Lectures] : Simple functions and their integrals, integral of a non -
negative measurable function, integral of extended real valued non -negative function, 
Monotone Convergence Theorem, Fatou‟s lemma, Integrable functions, Lebesgue 
Dominated Convergence T heorem, Lebesgue Spaces L_p, Holder‟s Inequality, 
Minkowski‟s Inequality, completeness theorem, L_{\infinity}. 
 
Modes of convergence [6 Lectures] : Relations between convergence almost 
everywhere, convergence in measure and convergence in L_p spaces, Egorof f‟s 
Theorem. 
 
Special Theorems (without proof) [14 Lectures]: Hahn Decomposition Theorem, Jordan 
Decomposition Theorem, Radon -Nikodym Theorem, Lebesgue Decomposition 
Theorem, Riesz Representation Theorem for L_p spaces. 
 
Textbook  
1. Royden, H.L., (1988), Real analysis, 3 rd Edition, Macmillan Publishing Company, 
New York 
2. Bartle,R.G., (2014), The Elements of Integration and Lebesgue Measure, John 
Wiley & Sons 
3.  Inder K.Rana, (2007), An Introduction to Measure and Integration, Narosa. 
 
Reference Books  
1. Parthasarathy, K.R., 2005, Introduction to Probability and Measure, TRIM Series, 
Vol. 33, Hindustan book agency, New Delhi. 
2. Halmos, P.R., 1976, Measure Theory, 1st Edition, Springer. 
  
Online Course Material  
1. Rana, I.K., Measure Theory, NPTEL Course Mat erial, Department of Mathematics, 
IIT Bombay, https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc17_ma15/  
610 
 
 
Title Financial Engineering Number MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA) Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
4. Securities Pricing Securities, Risk Management Assessment, prediction and decision 
making, under uncertainty, regarding future events and their consequences 
5. Portfolio Optimization Balancing risk and return 
6. Modeling Pricing of derivatives and Itos calculus 
 
Learning Outcomes  
4. Valuation of financial portfolio 
5. Pricing of financial derivatives (options and contracts) 
6. Understanding risk and return 
 
Contents  
 
[18 lectures]:  Introduction to financial markets and financial instruments, financial 
derivatives, risk and return, risky and risk free assets, interest rates, bonds, bonds pricing, 
spot and forward rates, investment portfolio, mean -variance analysis, capital asset pric ing 
model, arbitrage pricing theory. 
 
[22 lectures]:  Discrete time models, stock and money market models, principle of no 
arbitrage, pricing of contracts (forward and future), options, put -call parity, option pricing, 
martingales, Binomial model, CRR model, Black -Scholes formula, Greeks, random walk, 
Brownian motion, stochastic process, Itos integral and Ito-Deoblins formula. 
 
Textbook  
3. M. Capinski and T. Zastawniak, Mathematics for finance: an introduction to financial 
engineering, Springer, 2010.  
4. S.N. Neftci, Principles of financial engineering. Academic Press/Elsevier, 2009. 
 
Reference Books  
3. J.C. Hull, Options, futures and other derivatives. Pearson India, 2011. 
4. S.E. Shreve, Stochastic calculus for finance I: The binomial asset pricing model, 
Springer, 2000. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
611 
 
 
Course Title Wavelet Analysis and Applications Course No. MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/PhD (MA) Type Elective 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
1. To introduce the origin of wavelet transform 
2. To develop the understanding of multiresolution analysis for different types of 
signals 
3. To equip the students with various possible applications of the wavelet transform 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Strong understanding of Fourier and wavelet transform. 
2. Answer to the question why wavelet transform is a better tool for signal analysis. 
3. Implement and apply wavelet transform for various applications. 
 
Contents 
Fourier Analysis [12 Lectures] : Fourier and inverse Fourier transforms, Gabor 
transform, short time Fourier transform and the uncertainty principle. 
 
Wavelet Analysis [18 Lectures] : Mother wavelet, orthogonal and biorthogonal 
wavelets, continuous and discrete wavelet transform, basic pr operties of wavelet 
transforms, multiresolution analysis, Haar wavelet transform, Dabuchies Wavelet 
Transform, wave-packet transform 
 
Applications [12 Lectures]: Application of wavelet theory to feature detection, image 
denoising and compression. 
 
Text Books 
1. Chui, C. K., An Introduction to Wavelets, Academic Press Inc., New York, 1992. 
2. Debnath, L., Wavelet Transforms and Their Applications, Birkhauser, 2002. 
3. Mallat, S., A Wavelet Tour of Signal Processing, Academic Press, 1999. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Daubechies, I., Ten Lectures on Wavelets, Society for Industrial and Applied 
Mathematics, Philadelphia, PA, 1992 
2. Akansu, A.N.,  and Haddad, R.A.,  Multiresolution signal Decomposition: 
Transforms, Subbands and Wavelets, Academic Press, Oranld, Florida, 1992 
3. Kaiser, G., A Friendly Guide to Wavelets, Birkhauser, New York, 1995. 
 
Online course Material  
1. Gadre, V.M., Fundamentals of Wavelets, Filter Banks and Time Frequency 
Analysis, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mathematics, IIT Bombay, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108101093/. 
2. Strang, G. and Amaratunga, K., Wavelets, Filter Banks and Applications, Online 
Course Material, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,  
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/mathematics/18-327-wavelets-filter-banks-and-
applications-spring-2003/.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
612 
 
Course Title Optimization Techniques Course No. MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/PhD (MA) Type Elective 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
1. To train the student in the domain of linear and non-linear programming 
2. To give sufficient tools for solving programming problems which can be used by 
student for further applications in different areas of interest. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Simplex method, Charne‟s M-method, Two-phase Method 
2. Duality and Integer programming problem 
3. Transportation problem, assignment Problem, Karmakar‟s Algorithm and Wolf‟s 
method 
4. Newton‟s method, Conjugate direction method and Quasi-Newton methods 
5. KKT conditions, penalty and Barrier Methods, exact penalty functions  
 
Contents 
Linear Programming [23 lectures]: Linear combination of vectors, Convex set, Convex 
hull, Linear programming problem, feasible solution, basic feasible solution, graphical 
solution,  Simplex method Charne‟s M method, Two phase method, Solving system of 
equations and finding the inverse of  a matrix using simplex method, duality, 
Complementary Slackness Theorem, Duality and Simplex method, dual simplex 
algorithm, Integer Programming, Gomory‟s cut -constraint method, Branch and Bound 
method, Transportation problem, Assignment problem, application of optimization.  
 
Nonlinear Programming [19 lectures] : First and second order conditions, Iterative 
methods, line search methods, global convergence of descent algorithms, Newton‟s 
method, Conjugate direction method, Quasi -Newton Method, Constrained o ptimization 
- Lagrange Multipliers, Karush -Kuhn-Tucker conditions, Regular points, Sensitivity 
analysis, Quadratic Programming, Convex problems, applications of optimization. 
 
Text Book 
1. Luenberger, D. G., Linear and Nonlinear Programming, Yinyu Ye, Third  Edition, 
Springer, 2008.  
2. Kambo, N. S., Mathematical Programming Techniques,  Second Edition, Affiliated 
East West Press, 2005  
 
Reference Books 
1. Bazaraa, M. S., Sherali, H.D., and Shetty, C. M., Nonlinear Programming: Theory 
and Algorithms, Third Edition, Wiley publications, 2006 
2. Darst, R, Introduction to Linear Programming: Applications and Extensions, 
Dekker Publications, 1991 
 
Online Course Material: 
1. Goswami, A., Optimization, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mathematics, 
IIT Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111105039/1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
613 
 
Course Title Numerical Analysis Course No. MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Elective 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
1. Learn numerical techniques for a variety of mathematical problems 
2. Analyze the validity and error in the numerical results  
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Develop an understanding of numerical error and applicability of a particular 
method. 
2. Solve numerically algebraic equations, linear systems of equations, ordinary 
differential equations and eigenvalue problems. 
3. Carry out numerical differentiation, integration, and interpolation 
Contents 
Errors analysis [4 Lectures]: Numerical Algorithms and errors, Floating point systems, 
Types of error, Propagation of Error, the stability of algorithms. 
Nonlinear equations [8 Lectures] : Newton -Raphson Method, Fixed -Point Iteration 
Method, Muller‟s method, criterion for acceptance of a root, Rates of Convergence. 
Numerical solution of linear system of equations [8 Lectures]: Ill- conditioned systems, 
iterative methods (Gauss-Seidel method, Gauss-Jacobi method), matrix inversion, Rate 
of Convergence, Rayleigh Quotient, Min -max princi ple, the power and inverse power 
methods for eigenvalue problems. 
Interpolation [8 Lectures] : Errors in polynomial interpolation, finite differences, 
Newton‟s formulae for interpolation, Lagrange interpolation formula, Hermite 
interpolation, Spline interpolation. 
Numerical Integration and Differentiation [6 Lectures] : Newton -Cotes integration 
formulae, Difference Formulae, Method of Undetermined Coefficients. 
Numerical IVPs for Ordinary Differential Equations [8 Lectures]: Taylor series method, 
Euler‟s Method, Modified Euler‟s Methods, Runge-Kutta Methods. 
Tools to be used: MATLAB, Mathematica, Octave, Scilab. 
 
Text Books 
1. Süli, E. and Mayers, D.F., An Introduction to Numerical Analysis, Cambridge Uni. 
Press, 2006. 
2. Sastry, S.S., Introductory Methods of Numerical Analysis, Prentice Hall of India 
Pvt. Ltd., 2007. 
3. Burden, R. L., Numerical Analysis, 9th Edition, Cengage Learning India, 2012 
 
Reference Books 
1. Conte, S.D. and Boor, C., Elementary Numerical Analysis: An Algorithmic 
Approach, Third Edition, McGraw-Hill Publication, 1980 
2. Chapra, S.C., Applied Numerical Methods with MATLAB for Engineers and 
Scientists, 3 Ed., McGraw Hill, 2012 
 
Online course Material  
1. Lal, R. and Banerjee S., Numerical Analysis, NPTEL Course Material, Department 
of Mathematics, IIT Roorkee,  https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107062/ 
2. Usha, R., Numerical Analysis, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Mathematics, IIT Madras, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111106101/ 
  
 
614 
 
Course Title Number Theory Course No. MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Elective 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
 1. To give basic knowledge of Number theory. 
 2. To equip students with number theoretic tools which can be used in their fields of 
interest. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
 1. Basic knowledge of Residue systems and RSA Cryptosystems. 
 2. Diophantine Equations, Pells Equation, Binary Quadratic Forms and their Applications.  
 
Contents 
Introduction [10 Lectures] : Divisibility, prime numbers, properties and their distribution, 
complete and reduced residue systems, theorems of Fermat, Euler & Wilson, application to 
RSA cryptosystem. 
Congruences [10 Lectures] : Linear congruences, Chinese Remainder theorem, quadratic 
congruences, and Quadratic Reciprocity law. 
Arithmetical functions [15 Lectures] : examples, properties and their rate of growth, 
Continued fractions, and their connections with Diophantine approximations, applications 
to linear and Pell‟s equations, Binary quadratic forms, Partition: basic properties and 
results. 
Diophatine equations [6 Lectures] : linear, quadratic and higher degree, some general 
equations. 
 
Text Books  
1. David M. Burton, Elementary Number Theory. McGraw Hill Education, 2012. 
2. G. H. Hardy and E. M. Wright. An Introduction to the Theory of Numbers. Oxford 
University Press, 1960. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Niven, H. S. Zuckerman and H. L. Montgomery. An Introduction to the Theory of 
Numbers, Wiley, 1991 
2. K. Ireland, and M. Rosen. A Classical Introduction to Modern Number Theory. GTM -
84, Springer, 1990. 
 
Online Resources 
1. Saikia, A., Number Theory, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mathematics, IIT 
Guwahati, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111103020/. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
615 
 
Title Statistical Inference Number MAL7XX0 
Departmet Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/Ph.D. (MA) Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
1. To provide background in the area of Statistics. 
2.  To provide sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by students for 
further applications in their respective domains of interest. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
1.  Basic understanding of the Point and Interval Estimation, Testing of Hypotheses, 
Non-parametric Estimation 
2.  Knowledge in Random Sampling, Unbiased Estimation, Bias -Variance Tradeoff, 
Goodness of Fit.  
 
Contents  
Random Sampling & Sampling Distributions [5 lectures] : Random sampling, exact 
sampling distributions: Chi-square, t and F distributions, large sample theory. 
 Point and Interval Estimations [16 lectures]: Point estimator, properties of an estimator, 
factorization, MVUE, maximum likelihood method of estimation, Cramer -Rao bound, 
confidence interval estimation. 
Tests of Hypotheses [21 lectures]: Review of hypotheses testing, Neyman-Pearson theory, 
general linear hypothesis, method of least squares, analysis of variance (one way and two 
way), analysis of categorical data, Chi -square test for goodness of fit, test of 
independence, non-parametric tests. 
 
Text Books  
1. Rohatgi, V. K., Statistical Inference, Dover Publications Inc., 2003. 
2. Hogg, R. V., McKean, J. W., Craig, A. T., Introduction to Mathematical Statistics, 
Pearson, 2009. 
 
Reference Books  
1. Casella, G. and Berger, R. L., Statistical Inference, Brooks/Cole Publishing Company, 
2003. 
2. Rao, C. R., Linear Statistical Inference and Its Applications, Wiley, 2006. 
3. Gibbons, J.D. and Chakroborti, S., Nonparametric Statistical Inference, CRC Press, 
2010 
 
Online Course material: 
1. Zhou Fan, Introduction to Statistical Inference, Online Course Material, Stanford 
University, http://web.stanford.edu/class/stats200/ 
2. Kumar, S., Statistical Inference, NPTEL Course Material, Depart ment of 
Mathematics, IIT Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111105124/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
616 
 
Title Stochastic Calculus Number MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D 
[C] 
3–0–0-0 
[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/Ph.D.(MA) Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
1. To develop an understanding of financial market 
2. Given a discrete process, pricing of options, such as European, American, Asian 
and other exotic options 
3. To develop an understanding of change of measure, Martingales and Brownian 
motion 
4. Use of Black-Scholes model under various conditions 
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. Understanding derivatives and securities 
2. Pricing and valuation in discrete case 
3. Binomial model and self-financing strategy 
4. Black Scholes model and interest rate models 
 
Contents  
 
[10 lectures]:  General probability spaces, Gaussian and log -normal distribution, 
martingales and stopping times, Brownian motion and its properties, Ito‟s integral and 
martingale properties of Ito‟s integral. 
 
[12 lectu res]: Continuous time financial market models, Black -Scholes-Merton model, 
Black-Scholes PDE and formulas, risk -neutral valuation, option pricing, the Greeks, put -
call parity, Risk -neutral valuation, risk -neutral measure, Girsanov's theorem for change 
of m easure, martingale representation theorems, representation of Brownian 
martingales 
 
[20 lectures]:  Stochastic differential equations, existence and uniqueness of solutions, 
Feynman-Kac formula and its applications, models with stochastic volatility, pricin g and 
hedging in incomplete markets, bond markets, term -structures of interest rates, bond 
pricing, Short rate models, martingale models for short rate, Vasicek, Cox -Ingersoll-Ross 
and Hull-White models, multifactor models; Forward rate models, Heath -Jarrow-Morton 
model. 
 
Textbooks  
1. Shreve, S. E., Stochastic Calculus for Finance I; The Binomial Asset Pricing Model 
, Springer-Verlag, 2004  
2. Shreve, S. E., Stochastic Calculus for Finance II; Continuous -Time Model, 
Springer, 2004. 
 
Reference Books  
     1. Baxter, M. and Rennie, A., Financial Calculus, University Press, Cambridge 1996  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
617 
 
Title Calculus of variations and Integral 
Equations 
Number MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-D [3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/Ph.D.(MA) Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce variational problems with methods to solve them. 
2. Introduce the integral transforms and integral equations, and their solution 
methods 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Maximize or minimize functionals associated with the variational problems. 
2. Apply integral transforms to solve differential equations. 
3. Solve Fredholm and Volterra integral equations. 
 
Contents  
 
Calculus of Variation [20 Lectures] : Introduction to Variational problems, functionals, 
Functional dependence on first order derivatives, Euler equations, Functional dependence 
on functions of several independent variables, Variational problems with moving 
boundaries, Rayleigh-Ritz and Galerkin‟s Method. 
Integral Transforms [8 Lectures] : Fourier, Fourier sine/cosine and Laplace transforms 
and their properties, convolution theorem and application to solve differential equations.  
Integral Equations [12 Lectures] : Classification of Integral equat ions, Neumann‟s 
iterative method for Fredholm‟s equation of the second kind, Volterra type integral 
equations, Integral equations of the first kind and Convolution type Integral Equations.  
 
Text books  
1. Gupta, A.S., Calculus of Variation, Prentice Hall of India Pvt. Ltd. 1996 
2. Debnath L. and Bhatta, D., Integral transformations and their applications, 2 nd 
Edition,  Chapman and Hall / CRC publications, 2007 
3. Moiseiwitsch, B. L., Integral equations, Logman, 1977 
 
Reference Books  
1. Gelfand, I. M. and Francis, S.V., Calculus of Variation, Prentice Hall, New Jersey, 
1963 
2. Yosida, K., Lectures on differential and integral equations, Dover, 1991 
3. Hildebrand, F. B. , Methods of applied mathematics, 2nd Ed, Prentice-Hall, 1965 
 
Online Course Material  
1. Agrawal, P.N. and Pandey, D.N., Integral equations, calculus of variations and its 
applications, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mathematics, IIT Roorkee,  
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107103/  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
618 
 
Title Chaos Theory and its Applications Number MA7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 
[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/PhD (MA) Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
1. To equip the students with the basic fundamentals of chaos theory. 
2. Learning and understanding various routes to chaos.  
3. To introduce applications of chaos to various physical systems and its introduction 
in IFS. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. Notion of chaos in one dimension. 
2. Understanding Bifurcation theory and different routes to chaos. 
3. Two dimensional flows, phase portraits and chaos in higher dimension. 
 
Contents  
Discrete Dynamical Systems [16 Lectures]: One dimensional maps, Fixed points, periodic 
points and Stability, Basin of Attraction, Bifurcation, period doubling and route  to chaos, 
Sharkovsky‟s theorem, Li -Yorke Theorem, Lorentz System and chaos, Chaos in one 
dimension, density of periodic points, transitivity, sensitive dependence on initial 
conditions, cantor‟s set, conjugacy, symbolic dynamics, Various notions of chaos,  Phase 
space diagrams, Linear Systems and their stability. 
 
Continuous Dynamical Systems  [14 Lectures] : One dimensional flows, chaos in one 
dimension, Fixed points and Stability, Flows on the circle, Bifurcation, Saddle node 
Bifurcation, Transcritical Bifurcation, Pitchfork Bifurcation, Hopf Bifurcation, phase 
portraits,  existence and uniqueness, fixed po ints and linearization, conservative 
systems, limit cycles, Poincare-Bendixson Theorem.   
 
Fractals and Dynamical Systems   [12 Lectures]: Fractals, cantor set, dimension of self -
similar fractals, Box dimension, correlation dimension, Iterated Function Syst em, Collage 
Theorem and Image Compression, Julia and Mandelbrot Sets. 
 
Textbook  
1. Saber N.  Elaydi, Discrete Chaos: With Applications in Science and Engineering, 
CRC Press, Second Edition. 
2. Steven H.  Strogatz, Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos:  With Application s to 
Physics, Biology, Chemistry and Engineering, Westview Press, First edition. 
 
Reference Books  
1. H Nagashima and Y Baba, Introduction to Chaos:  Physics and Mathematics of 
Chaotic Phenomena, CRC Press; First edition. 
2. G. Stuck and Michael Brin, Introduction to Dynamical Systems, Cambridge 
University Press; First edition 
 
Online Course Material  
1. Nagar A. (IIT Delhi) Chaotic Dynamical Systems , 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111102110/ 
2. Banerjee S. (IIT Kharagpur), Chaos, Fractals and Dynamic Systems ,  
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108105054/ 
 
 
 
 
619 
 
Title Machine Learning and Pattern 
Recognition 
Number MA7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 
[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA) Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce the mathematical and statistical techniques used in pattern recognition.  
2. Impart knowledge on differentiate among various pattern recognition techniques. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Formulate high dimensional feature vectors from observations. 
2. Select an appropriate pattern analysis tool for analysing data in a given feature 
space. 
3. Apply pattern analysis tools to practical applications and detect patterns in the 
data. 
 
Contents  
Introduction [2 Lectures] : Definitions, data sets for Pattern Recognition, Different 
Paradigms of Pattern Recognition. 
 
Bayes Decision Theory [8 Lectures] : Bayes Decision Theory: Bayes decision rule, 
Minimum error rate classification, Normal density and discriminant functions, Bayesian 
networks. 
 
Generative Methods [8 Lectures] : Maximum Likelihood and Bayesian Parameter 
Estimation, Nonparametric techniques. 
 
Discriminative Methods [8 Lectures] : Distance -based methods, Linear Discriminant 
Functions, Artificial Neural Networks, Support Vector Machines. 
 
Clustering and Principal Component Analysis [8 Lectures]: k-means clustering, Gaussian 
Mixture Modeling, EM-algorithm, PCA, Kernel PCA, Probabilistic PCA. 
 
Combining Classifiers [8 Lectures] : Bagging and Boosting, Adaboost, Bayesian Model 
Averaging. 
 
Textbook  
1. Duda, R. O., Hart, P. E. and Stork, D., Pattern Classification 2/e, Wiley, 2002.  
2. Bishop, C., Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, Springer, 2006. 
 
Reference Books  
1. Theodoridis, S. and Koutroumbas, K. (2008) Pattern Recognition, Edition 4. 
Academic Press.  
2. MacKay, D.J.C. (2004) Information Theory, Inference and Learning Algorithms, 
Cambridge University Press. 
3. Cristianini, N. and Taylor, J. S. (2000) An Introduction to Support Vector 
Machines, Cambridge University Press. 
  
Online Course Material  
1. Das, S. and Murthy, C.A. (IIT Madras) Pattern Recognition , 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106106046/ 
 
620 
 
Title Numerical solutions of Partial Differential 
Equations 
Number MAL8XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P 
[C] 
3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA) Type Elective  
Prerequisite Partial Differential Equations   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will introduce  
1. finite difference schemes for numerical solutions of partial differential equations 
2. carry out numerical analysis of various finite difference schemes  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. apply finite difference schemes for numerical solution of partial differential 
equations 
2. carry out error analysis and stability analysis of finite difference schemes 
 
Contents  
 
Fractal 1: Numerical methods for PDE (MAL8XX1) 
 
[8 Lectures]  Characterization of PDEs, Finite difference methods for elliptic, parabolic 
and hyperbolic problems. 
 
[6 Lectures] Stability, consistency and convergence theory, dissipation and dispersion, 
error estimates. 
 
Fractal 2: Numerical Analysis for PDE (MAL8XX2) 
 
Parabolic equations [6 Lectures]:  Fourier analysis of the error, Alternating direction 
implicit method 
 
Elliptic equations [6 Lectures] : Stability analysis by the energy method, Error analysis 
with a maximum principle, asymptotic error estimates, convergence result 
 
Hyperbolic equations  [10 Lectures]:  CFL condition, Von Neumann stability Analysis, 
upwind scheme, Lax -Wendroff scheme, leap -frog scheme, Hamiltonian systems and 
symplectic schemes 
 
Numerical linear algebra  [6 Lectures]:  Classical iterative Methods for solving linear 
systems, large sparse linear systems, GMRES algorithm, preconditioned Conjugate 
Gradient method, multigrid method (overview), Newton's method and its variations for 
solving nonlinear systems. 
 
Text books  
1. Quarteroni, A. and Valli, A. , Numerical Approximation of Partial Differential 
Equations, Springer, 1997 
2. Morton, K. W.  and Mayers, D. F. , Numerical solution of partial differential 
equations, CUP, 2005 
 
Reference Books  
1. Thomas, J. W. , Numerical partial differential equations: Finite difference 
methods, Springer, 1995 
2. Trefethen, L. N. and David Bau III, Numerical Linear Algebra, SIAM, 1997 
 
Online Course Material  
621 
 
1. Nayak, A. K., Numerical methods: Finite Difference Approach, NPTEL Course, 
Department of Mathematics, IIT Roorkee, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107107/. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
622 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Courses 
 
Offered by 
 
Humanities and Social Science Department 
 
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
623 
 
PG Compulsory Courses (to be approved) 
1. HSN7XX0 Technical Communication 1-0-0 (1) 
2. HSN7XX0  Ethics and Professional Life 1-0-0 (1) 
 
PG Electives (to be approved) 
1. HSL7XX0  Cine-Politics under National Emergency 3-0-0 (to be approved) 
2. HSL7XX0 Sociology of Science and Technology 3-0-0 (to be approved) 
3. HSL7XX0 Digital Society 3-0-0 (to be approved) 
 
PG Electives (already approved) 
 
 
4. HSL7XX0 Gender and Society 3-0-0 (3) 
5. HSL7XX0 Sociocultural Theories 3-0-0 (3) 
6. HSL7XX0 Foundations of Sustainability 3-0-0 (3) 
7. HSL7XX0 Nature Writings in American Literature 3-0-0 (3) 
8. HSL7XX0 Literature and Environment 3-0-0(3) 
9. HSL7XX0 Twentieth Century Analytic Philosophy 3-0-0 (3) 
10. HSL7XX0 Language and Cognition 3-0-0 (3) 
11. HSL7XX0 Ethical Theories and Moral Practices 3-0-0 (3) 
12. HSL7XX0 Philosophy of Mind 3-0-0 (3) 
13. HSL7XX0 Bioengineering Ethics 3-0-0 (3) 
14. HSL7XX0 Cognitive Science 3-0-0 (3) 
15. HSL7XX0 Qualitative and Quantitative Methodology 3-0-0(3) 
16. HSL7XX0 Consciousness  3-0-0 (3) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
624 
 
Title Technical Communication Number HSNXX 
Department Humanities and Social Sciences L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 
Offered for M.Tech and PhD Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite None   
Objectives  
The Instructor will:  
1. Enable a student to face the challenges in communication, primarily in a technical milieu. 
2.Enhance a student‟s English Language skills namely listening, speaking, reading and writing 
(LSRW) and the role played by them in the process of communication. 
3. Make students conversant in addressing communication challenges that impact organizations 
through sharing of best practices and group learning. 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Comprehend, recognize and articulate the formal elements of specific genres of technical 
communication. 
2.To gain a familiarity with practical and theoretical aspects of various trends and debates in 
technical communication 
3. To develop a sensibility and appreciation for some of the ideas, issues, and problems involved 
in writing about technology and in workplace writing. 
Contents Part I (HSS Faculty) Total –  07 hours (07 Lectures)  
Introduction to Communication – Introduction to Communication and the Importance of 
Communicating in English, Role of Emotions in Communication, Basics of Communication, 
Purpose and Audience, Cross-Cultural Communication, Language as a tool of communication, 
LSRW. (1 hour) 
Listening -Introduction to Listening, Types of Listening, Active Listening, Barriers to Listening, 
Listening to pre-recorded audio visual material/film. (1 hour) 
Speaking –Introduction to Speaking, Mock Personal Interviews, Body Language, Organizing and 
learning to make a presentation, Phonetics and Basic Pronunciation, Common Errors in English, 
Telephone Etiquette, Group Discussions.(2 hour) 
Reading - Purpose of Reading, Topic Sentence and its role, Reading for different purposes, 
Reading Comprehension, Reading Techniques. (1 hour) 
Writing– Introduction, Importance, Characteristics, Impersonal and Formal language, Elements 
of Style, Techniques for Good Technical Writing, Paragraph Writing, Writing a Formal Letter, 
Writing an Email, Plagiarism. (2 hours) 
 
Part II (Faculty of Engineering and Sciences) – 07 hours (07 Lectures) 
625 
 
Introduction to  Technical Communication 
Writing – Mechanics of Technical Writing, Organization and Structure in Technical Writing, 
Writing an abstract, Writing a Research Paper, Writing a Review, Report Writing, Writing 
Technical descriptions, Copyediting and formatting, Referencing, Citations, Plagiarism. (4 hours) 
Reading – Identifying Language Errors, Reading Comprehension with specific reference to 
passages/articles in Science and Technology. (1 hour) 
Lectures with Hands on Training – Grammarly, End note, Language software, Document 
processing using software. (2 hours) 
 
Reference Books 
1.Raman, Meenakshi and Sangeeta Sharma. Technical Communication: Principles and Practice. 
Oxford University Press: New Delhi, 2011. 
2. A Text Book of English for Engineers and Technologists. Division of Humanities and Social 
Sciences, Anna University, Orient Black Swan: Chennai, 2002. 
 
Online Course Material 
1.Technical English for Engineers-https://nptel.ac.in/courses/109106094/ 
 
  
626 
 
Title Ethics and Professional Life Number HSN7XX0 
Department Humanities and Social Sciences L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 
Offered for M.Tech and PhD Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite None   
Objectives  
1. To help students identifying ethical responsibilities linked to their professions 
2. To assist students in analyzing professional decisions from ethical perspectives 
      3.   To help students cultivating professional integrity and moral ideals 
Learning Outcomes  
1. Students will be familiar with the manifold responsibilities attached to their professions 
2. Students shall be able to appreciate the role of normative principles in taking 
professional decisions  
3. Students shall be able to respond to ethical issues with integrity and creative imagination 
Contents:  
1. Conceptual Foundations:  Why Should One be Moral?; Relevance of Professi onal Ethics; Tools 
and Techniques; Professional Codes; Normativity of Science and Technology   
        (2 hours) 
2. Professions and Moral Dilemmas:  Contemporary Ethical Issues (to be analyzed with the help of 
case studies and focusing on the nature of the group): 
Personal: Normative Numbness; Conflicts of Interests; Theft; Deception; Corruption; Partiality  
Interpersonal: Contracts; Violation of Rights; Consent and Dissent; Special Obligations; privacy and 
confidentiality 
Organizational: Fairness within the Organization; Hiring; Conduct at Workplace  
Social: Norms for a Game Changer; IPR; Reliability of Research Findings; Risk Assessment; Animal 
and Human Experimentation      (09 hours) 
3. Professional Responsibility : Individual and Coll ective Responsibility; Corporate Social 
Responsibility; Rectificatory Issues; Sustainability     (3 hours) 
  
Text Books: 
1. Ethical Issues in Professional Life, Callahan, J., Oxford University Press, 1998.  
2. Philosophy of Technology and Engineering Sciences, Meijers, A., Elsevier, 2009 
 
 
627 
 
Title Cine-Politics under the National Emergency Number HSL7XX0 
Department Humanities and Social Sciences L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 
Offered for B. Tech., M. Tech. and Ph.D. Programs  Type Elective  
Prerequisite None    
Objectives  
1.To help students explore the intricacies of cultural forms and practices in the  
larger context of the political lives of the Indian nation 
2.To help students become familiar with some of the most significant events in the 
history of post-independence India through the prism of film history and state policy 
3.To make students familiar with conceptual apparatuses in cinema studies and with 
the overlaps between political and cultural histories 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.Read archival and other materials that are relevant for history-writing  
2.Explore associations between public institutions, national history, mass and avant -
garde culture and the ever-changing socio-politico-cultural dynamics 
3.Develop acquaintance with contemporary scholarly writings on Indian history, 
cinema and politics  
 
Contents  
Introducing Emergency and its Politics –The National Emergency, historical trajectory, 
relevance in Indian politics, literature review (6 lectures)  
Cinema, Cine -Politics and Cultural Politics – Defining Cine -Politics, Nation -Industry 
negotiations, carrying out cine -archival research, reading of film industry and film 
society materials/publications, review of relevant theoretical schools in Indian 
cinema studies (12 lectures)     
Sponsorship and Censorship: the Indian New Wave and Other Cinemas - Censorship, 
Prime Minister‟s 20-point program, role of I&B ministry, industrial responses, Indian 
New Wave and state -sponsored cinema in the 1970s, debates on  sponsorship and 
film economy (12 lectures)  
Globalization of the Dictatorial in the 1970s: Digital Remembering – The idea of the 
dictatorial, ideological associations between global dictatorial regimes, cine -cultural 
evidence and responses, archiving of ev idence in the days of the digital, conclusion 
(12 lectures)  
 
628 
 
Textbooks 
1. Rajadhyaksha, Ashish. Indian Cinema in the Time of Celluloid: From Bollywood to 
the Emergency. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2009.  
Reference Book  
1. Joshi, Priya, and Rajinder Dudrah, eds. The 1970s and Its Legacies in India’s 
Cinemas. New York: Routledge, 2014.  
Online Course Material 
1. https://indiancine.ma/  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
629 
 
Title Sociology of Science and Technology Number HSL7XX0 
Department Humanities and Social Sciences L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 
Offered for B. Tech, M.Tech and Ph. D. Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
1. To help students conceptualize science and technology as embedded in culture, 
politics and sociality and understand how technical knowledge is produced in 
society.  
2. To help students explore the dynamic relationship between technology and 
society and discover how technology and society influence each other. 
3. To make students conversant with important and new concepts in science and 
technology studies in social anthropology.   
Learning Outcomes  
1.Comprehend technological progress as a social process  
2.Find connections between science, technology and culture and think  beyond 
simple binaries like „natural‟ and „social‟ sciences and „nature‟ and „culture‟. 
3.Develop sensitivity towards an inclusive, sustainable use of technology and 
appreciate the significance of diversity in science studies  
Contents  
Introduction to th e Sociology of Science  – Introduction to the subject, its founding 
concepts and traditions, methods of doing STS studies, History of Science and its 
philosophical traditions – logical positivism,  falsification and its critique (5 lectures) 
Methodology of Science and its s ocial connections - Structure of scientific revolutions, 
Ethics and ethos in science and deviance in practice of science, the Matthew Effect, 
and practicing „agnostic‟ science, scientific inventions as cultural capital, social life of 
scientists. (8 lectures)   
 Social Construction of Science - Methods of representation in science, Ethnography of a 
laboratory, social construction of „realities‟, social construction of nature, Effect of 
social understanding of race and gender on production o f scientific knowledge (9 
lectures) 
STS as Social Science  – Actor Network theory, Pasteurization and the world of non -
humans, influence of science studies on social sciences, ecological understanding of 
the world, towards an inclusive understanding of the universe through STS.  (8 
lectures)  
Technology and New Media – Technology as applied science, Gaming as culture, 
Hacking as counter -culture, Social media, Algorithms as social documents (8 
lectures) 
Science and Technology in India  - Science & Technology in Colonial India, Development 
630 
 
of Indian Science, Science and Governance in India (4 lectures) 
Textbooks 
1.Sismondo, S. (2010), An Introduction to Science and Technology Studies , 2nd 
Edition, Wiley Blackwell 
2.Miller, D. et. al. edited (2012), Digital Anthropology, Berg. 
Reference Book  
Felt U., Fouche, R. et. al. edited (2017), The Handbook of Science and Technology 
Studies, MIT Press 
Online Course Material 
1. Mallick, S.  Science, Technology and Society , NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
HSS, IIT Guwahati, https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc17_hs26/preview       
2.  Mishra, A.  Sociology of Science, NPTEL Course Material, Department of HSS, Indian 
Institute of Technology Roorkee, https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc18_hs09/preview 
 
 
  
631 
 
Title Digital Society  Number HSL7XX0 
Department Humanities and Social Sciences L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech., M.Sc., M.Tech, Ph.D. Type Elective  
Prerequisite None   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
Introduce students to the dominant discourses that frame debates on digital society  
Familiarize students with the literature pertaining to web technologies  and their 
cultural, legal and ethical formations and practices 
Familiarize students with the complex relationships between digital cultures and 
digital divides 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Identify the ways in which digital media shape identity 
Utilize new opportunities for meaningful data collection from and using sophisticated 
forms of artificial intelligence 
Identify knowledge and truth amongst the abundance of information 
Contents  
Introduction to Digital Society : Digital components of a connected society  (2 
Lectures)  
Theorizing Digital Society: New forms of power; Data as sociomaterial objects ; 
Archives; Digital veillance (6 Lectures) 
Digital Identities and Relationships : Self and the Digital Society; Embodied 
Identities in Digital Society; Bias and Privilege  – Digital Inequalities ; Marginalised 
Histories; Cyborgs (6 Lectures)  
Digital Spaces and Practices : Rethinking space and surveillance in digital societies; 
Gender, Space, and Place in Digital Societies ; Urban Informatics and Sociological 
Imagination - Smart cities ; Digital Healthcare; Mobility in Digital Society; Digital 
Heritage (10 Lectures) 
Network Society: The Internet as a Network ; Networks and the Cultural Imaginary; 
Inequalities in the Network Society; Information Capital; Interface Design for Diverse 
Populations (10 Lectures)  
Re-conceptualizing Research in a Digital Age: Information Management  – Data 
Analysis Software ; Large Digi tal Systems ; Data protection and the politics of data 
privacy (8 Lectures) 
Textbook  
1. Lupton,D., (2015), Digital Sociology, London, New York: Routledge 
632 
 
2. Gere,C., (2008), Digital Culture, 2nd Edition, London: Reaktion Books Limited 
Reference Books  
1.  Bentkowska-Kafel, A., Cashen, T., and Gardiner, H. (Eds.) (2009), Digital Visual 
Culture: Theory and Practice, Bristol and Chicago: Intellect Books 
2. Karaganis, J . (Ed.), ( 2007), Structures of Participation in Digital Culture , Social 
Science Research Council, Columbia University Press 
3.  Tredinnick, L. (2008), Digital Information Culture: The Individual and Society in the 
Digital Age, Oxford: Chandos Publishing Limited 
Online Resources  
1. Digital Humanities Seminar Video Archive of the Open Universit y, UK, 
http://www.open.ac.uk/arts/research/digital-humanities/videos  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
633 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Non Graded Institute Level Courses 
For 
 
M.Tech. and Ph.D. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
634 
 
Title Systems Engineering and Project Management 
 
Number OAL7XX0 
Department   L-T-P [C] 1-0-0  [1] 
Offered for M.Tech Program 
 
Type Compulsory
NGU 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
Systems Engineering is an interdisciplinary approach and means to enable  realization of 
successful systems. It focuses on defining requirements and then proceeding with design 
synthesis and system validation while considering the complete problem includin g operations, 
performance, test, manufacturing, cost, and schedule.  
This course intends to help students to develop the capability of systems thinking by 
introducing basics of systems  engineering theory, methods, and tools through lecture and 
practice.  
Learning Outcomes 
After taking this class, you should be able to: 
 Develop a systems engineering plan for a realistic project. 
 Judge the applicability of any proposed process, strategy, or methodology for systems 
engineering  
 Apply systems engineering tools (e.g., requirements development and management, 
robust design, Design Structure Matrix) to realistic problems. 
 Know how to proactively design for and manage system lifecycle targets. 
 Understanding TRL and MRL concepts 
 Use project management tools 
 
Contents 
 Introduction - Terminology, Systems Thinking, Today‟s Challenges (1 L) 
 Requirements Elicitation,  Documenting System Requirements - Proper Specification 
Language, Depth of Definition (1 L) 
 Requirements Analysis - Context Diagrams, Functional Analysis, State Diagrams (2 L) 
 Requirements Validation - User Feedback Techniques, Requirements Reviews (1 L) 
 System Architecture - Subsystem Definition, Hierarchical Analysis, Design for Reuse, 
Interface Management (2 L) 
 Specialty Engineering - Producibility/Manufacturability, Reliability/Availability, 
Maintainability/Serviceability, Usability/User Interface, Design-to-Cost (2 L) 
 Managing Systems Engineering - Estimating, Planning, Tracking, System Engineering 
635 
 
Management Plan, Work Breakdown Structure, Technical Reviews (2 L) 
 Introduction to the concepts of TRL (Technology Readiness Levels) and 
MRL(Manufacturability Readiness level)  (1 L) 
 Course Project  ( 8 hrs of self-work corresponding to 2 scheduled contact hours) 
o Application of Systems Engineering Methodology to the Major Project (M.Tech)  
o Use of Microsoft Project as the software tool for managing their M.Tech project 
 
Evaluation 
Presentation of Systems Engineering Process of the Major Project 
 
Textbook 
 
1. Introduction to Systems Engineering by Ian Faulconbridge, Michael Ryan (Kindle 
Edition) 
Argos Press, 2015.  
2. Systems Engineering Fundamentals  
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/aeronautics...systems-engineering.../sefguide_01_01.pdf 
3. https://www.sebokwiki.org/wiki/Introduction_to_Systems_Engineering 
 
Web Resources 
1. https://www.coursera.org/learn/systems-engineering 
2. https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/aeronautics-and-astronautics/16-842-
fundamentals-of-systems-engineering-fall-2015/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
636 
 
Title Innovation and IP Management 
Management of Innovation and IP 
Number OAL7XX0 
Department OA L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 
Offered for All M. Tech and PhD students <Shall also be 
considered for B.Tech Students> 
Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Not required   
Objectives 
This course is intended to familiarise students with basic concepts of IP, its 
relevance to innovations and their effective exploitation including emerging societal 
issues. 
The Instructor will: 
1. Highlight concept of Innovations and processes that leads to innovations. 
2. Illustrate the significance of IPR in the context of Innovations and Demonstrate 
how information in IP data bases are used to enhance quality of innovations. 
3. Explain how IP can be meaningfully Exploited in commerce and for benefit of 
society. 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Use IP information as an effective resource for innovation. 
2.  Protecting innovations as IP.  
3.  Design IP strategies for protection of innovations and commercial exploitations.  
Contents  
Module I: Types of creations and innovations using the mind, Modes of IP protection of 
the output of the Human mind, Such as Patents, Design registrations, Trade Mark, 
Copyright, Trade Secrets, Geographical Indications. (5L) 
Module-2 : Searching IP databases to extract technical information for research. 
Concept of Patentable inventions. Evaluating Inventions for patentability and drafting of 
patent specifications. Procedures for patent applications and their examination. 
Introducing processes for Design registrations, Trade Mark, Copyright, Trade Secrets, 
Geographical Indications. (6L) 
Module-3 : Use of IP in Trade and Commerce. Societal issues. (3L) 
Textbook 
 
 
637 
 
 
 
Ph.D. Programme 
 
In 
 
Digital Humanities 
 
 
Offered by 
 
Digital Humanities 
 Inter Disciplinary Research Platform 
 
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur 
 
 
 
 
 
638 
 
Introduction 
  
The digital revolution of the 20th and 21st centuries has created new knowledge and 
spaces for humankind to evolve culturally with the construction of techniques and 
technologies. As a corollary, a new field of organised research emerged at the beginning 
of the 2000s examining the use and application of digital technologies in the humanities, 
liberal arts, social science scholarship, computer sciences, a nd beyond. Popularly nested 
under an umbrella term “Digital Humanities”, this area of scholarship takes a critical 
stance to examine the role, use, application, and impact of digital tools in our everyday 
life, our societies, economies, cultures, and gover nments. However, while the use of 
computational tools in social science and humanities work is not very new, the 
availability of a large body of cultural artefacts after the digital turn, as well as 
emergence of new kinds of digital objects and embodiments , has opened up several 
possibilities for social science and humanities research, practice and pedagogy using 
computational approaches. Very soon, the question of whether something is, or is not, 
„digital‟ will be increasingly secondary as many forms of cu lture become mediated, 
produced, accessed, distributed or consumed through digital devices and technologies. 
In other words, the field of Digital Humanities is expected to grow on interdisciplinary  
rather than multidisciplinary principles. The research focus and pedagogy in this program 
emphasize many of the emerging epistemological questions on knowledge production 
about generating digital data from material objects, and on rethinking existing processes 
of knowledge production. 
 
Objective of the Program 
  
IIT Jodhpur is one of the pioneering institutes in the country currently offering an 
interdisciplinary doctoral degree in Digital Hum anities. This doctoral program  offers 
unique opportunities to redraw conventional disciplinary boundaries among the 
humanities, the social sciences, the arts, technology and engineering, and the natural 
sciences. Primary objectives of the program include (but are not limited to):  
 
1. Introducing and exploring a broad spectrum of perspectives on the Digital 
Humanities 
2. Developing familiarity with a range of Digital Humanities projects, as well as the 
ability to evaluate the tools and methods involved in creating and analysing those 
projects 
3. Critical and reflexive use of digital tools, technologies, and spaces by 
understanding that all technologies are complex and socially situated, through 
which humans make meaning 
 
Doctoral students opting for this program are expected to contribute towards  integrating 
disciplinary approaches of the humanities, liberal arts, social sciences, and computer 
technologies, with cross -disciplinary theorising and research that can be avant -garde to 
639 
 
the field of Digital Humanities. Doctoral research in Digital Human ities shall be premised 
on project-oriented knowledge production, the practical application of methods, and shall 
involve interdisciplinary collaboration workflows. To enhance such collaborative 
workflows, the  programme will actively involve academics and resource people from 
other institutes and universities across the country and internationally.  
Expected Graduate Attributes 
 In depth understanding of the fundamental concepts of broad areas in Humanities, 
Social Sciences, and application areas of basic computational tools.   
1. Ability to undertake problems in multidisciplinary domains of Humanities, Social 
Sciences, Computer Sciences, Mathematics, and related disciplines. 
2. Skills to demonstrate basic principles of Humanities and Social Sciences through 
various application areas and analytical processes.  
3. Ability to make effective oral and written technical communication. 
4. Appreciation and adherence to norms of professional ethics. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Appreciate and critically discuss Digital Humanities projects in light of current 
methods and theoretical approaches to the field 
2. Explain how Digital Humanities methods and practices are applied in different 
disciplines 
3. Skillset to plan, develop, and evaluate a Digital Humanities research project 
4. Fundamental understanding of research tools to plan for and evaluate the 
effectiveness of Digital Humanities methods including a multitude of platforms 
such as social media and web tools. 
5. Understand what data mean in different contexts 
6. Capture, collect, and analyse a variety of data types related to Digital Humanities 
research project  
 
Program Structure and Credit Structure: 
Semester 1 Semester 2 
Electives* Electives* 
Semester 3 Semester 4 
DH799Ph.D. Thesis DH799 Ph.D. Thesis 
Semester 5 Semester 6 
DH799 Ph.D. Thesis DH799 Ph.D. Thesis 
Semester 7 Semester 8 
DH799 Ph.D. Thesis DH799 Ph.D. Thesis 
*The number of electives and credit structure are as per the Ph.D. norms of the 
Institute. Electives are to be chosen in consultation with the Coordinator, Digital 
Humanities. A maximum of one Self Study course may be included in the course 
curriculum.  
 
  
640 
 
List of recommended electives:  
 
Digital Humanities (IDRP) 
DHL7xx0 Fundamentals of Digital Humanities (3 credits) 
DHL7xx0 Digital Methods and Tools (3 credits) 
DHL7xx0 Selected Topics in Digital Humanities I (1 credit)  
DHL7xx0 Selected Topics in Digital Humanities II (2 credits)  
DHL7xx0 Selected Topics in Digital Humanities III (3 credits)  
DHD7xx0 DH Project (3 credits; L-T-P: 0-0-6) 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering 
CSL7xx0 Selected Topics in AI - I (1 credit) 
CSL7xx0 Selected Topics in AI – II (2 credits) 
CSL7xx0 Selected Topics in AI – III (3 credits) 
CSL7xx0 Natural Language Processing (3 credits) 
CSL7xx0 Introduction to Augmented Reality and Virtual Reality (3 credits)  
CSL7xx0 Data Visualization (3 credits)  
CSL7xx0 Machine Learning I (3 credits) 
CSL7xx0 Security and its applications (3 credits) 
CSL7xx0 Computational Linguistics (3 credits) 
CSL7xx0 Algorithms for Big Data (3 credits)  
CSL7xx0 Machine Learning with Big Data (3 credits)  
Department of Electrical Engineering 
EEL7xx0 Data Compression (3 credits)  
Department of Humanities and Social Sciences 
HSL7xx0 Sociology of Science and Technology (3 credits) 
HSL7xx0 Digital Society (3 credits) 
HSL7xx0 Cine-Politics under the National Emergency (3 credits)  
Department of Mathematics 
MAL7xx1 Statistics I (1 credit) 
MAL7xx0 Statistics II (2 credits) 
 
 
641 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DH Electives 
  
642 
 
Title Fundamentals of Digital Humanities Number DHL7010 
Department IDRP-DH L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. (Cr>=100); M.Sc. (Cr >=30); 
M.Tech. (Cr.>0); Ph.D. (Cr.>0) 
Type Elective  
Prerequisite  None     
  
Objectives 
1. Introduce and explore a broad spectrum of perspectives on the Digital 
Humanities 
2. Develop familiarity with a range of Digital Humanities projects, as well as 
the ability to evaluate the tools and methods involved in creating and 
analysing those projects 
3. Critical and reflexive use of digital tools, technologies, and spaces by 
understanding that all technologies are complex and socially situated, 
through which humans make meaning 
  
Learning Outcomes  
1. Appreciate and critically discuss Digital Humanities projects in light of 
current methods and theoretical approaches to the field 
2. Explain how Digital Humanities methods and practices are applied in 
different disciplines 
3. Skillset to plan, develop, and evaluate a Digital Humanities research 
project 
  
Fractal Course Contents  
  
Fractal 1: Digital Humanities: Emerging Contours (DHL7011) 
  
Introduction: What is Digital Humanities, Evolution of classical disciplines into 
Digital Humanities 
Digital Cultural Heritage; Conceptualising DH projects; Interdisciplinary style of 
proposal writing [4 Lectures]  
Computational Humanities [3 Lectures]  
Digital Embodiment: Embodied Identities in Digital Society; Bias and Privilege – 
643 
 
Marginalised Histories; Cyborgs, Gender, Space, and Place in Digital Societies [4 
Lectures]  
Literature and Technology, Text Analysis, Data Visualisation [3 Lectures]  
  
Hands-on Exercises 
1. Identifying DH projects from traditional projects: Concrete examples and a 
range of approaches to DH from the traditional disciplines.  
2. Digital Humanities Project Critiques: Exploring the project goals, what type 
of data it used, how that data was found and/or transformed, what 
technologies were used, and why.  
 
References Books 
1. Gere, C., (2008), Digital Culture, 2nd Edition, London: Reakt ion Books 
Limited 
2. Bentkowska-Kafel, A., Cashen, T., and Gardiner, H. (Eds.) (2009), Digital 
Visual Culture: Theory and Practice, Bristol and Chicago: Intellect Books 
3. Karaganis, J. (Ed.), (2007), Structures of Participation in Digital Culture, 
Social Science Research Council, Columbia University Press 
 
Online-course material 
Digital Humanities Seminar Video Archive of the Open University, UK, 
http://www.open.ac.uk/arts/research/digital-humanities/videos 
 
Fractal 2: Data and Knowledge representations (DHL7012) 
 
Introduction: Data Sources, Transcribing (Multimedia data), Conversation, 
Discourse Analysis [7 lectures] 
Knowledge Engineering: Ontological engineering, Representation of Ontologies, 
Common Logic, RDFS, Web Ontology Language (OWL), Topic Maps, Multimedia 
Web Ontology Language, Applications [ 7 Lectures] 
  
Hands-on Exercises 
1. Ethnographic data collection and analysis: A case study 
2. Ontology formation from Multimedia Data: A case study 
 
644 
 
References Books 
1. Christopher Joseph Jenks (2011), Transcribing Talk and Interaction: Issues 
in the Representation of Communication Data, John Benjamins Publishing 
Company. 
2. Russel, S. & Norvig, P., (2009), Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, 
Pearson Education 
3. S. Chaudhury, A. Mallik, and H. Ghogh (2016), Multim edia Ontology 
Representation and Applications, CRC Press. 
Online-Course Materials 
1. Knowledge Representation and Reasoning  
http://videolectures.net/ssll09_pagnucco_krr/ 
http://videolectures.net/eswc2018_rudolph_knowledge_representation/ 
 
Fractal 3: Digital Archives (DHL7013) 
  
Digital memory, Methods of archiving, Theorizing the archive, database [6 lectures] 
Exhibition, installation, audio-visual essays [4 lectures]  
Aesthetics of recreation/ Digital aesthetics, Digital Art [4 lectures]  
  
References Books 
1. Ernst, W., (2013), Digital Memory and the Archive, Minneapolis: University 
of Minnesota Press  
2. Grau, O., Coones, W., and Ruhse, V. (Eds.) (2017), Museum and Archive on 
the Move: Changing Cultural Institutions in the Digital Era, Berlin and 
Boston: De Gruyter  
 
Online-course material 
1. https://indiancine.ma/  
 
  
645 
 
Title Digital Methods and Tools Number DHL7XX0 
Department IDRP-DH L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. (Cr>=100); M.Sc. (Cr >=30); 
M.Tech. (Cr.>0); Ph.D. (Cr.>0)  
Type Elective  
Prerequisite  None     
  
Objectives 
1. Introduce and explore avenues of new and emerging societal and cultural 
entities and methodologies in Digital Humanities.  
2. Provide a conceptual foundation that will allow students to engage critically 
with Digital Humanities research and methods. 
3. Provide basic training digital and computational tools and techniques that can 
enhance students‟ own research. 
Learning Outcomes  
1. Fundamental understanding of research tools that will help students plan for 
and evaluate the effectiveness of Digital Humanities methods including a 
multitude of platforms such as social media and web tools. 
2. Understand what data mean in different contexts 
3. Capture, collect, and analyse a variety of data types related to Digital 
Humanities research project  
 
Fractal Course Contents  
  
Fractal 1: Introduction to Data Science (DHL7XX1) 
 
Components of Fractal 1 from  Introduction to Data Science (M.Tech DCS 
Program) 
Data preparation, Data pre -processing, Data Cleaning, Data Integration, Data 
Transformation, Data Reduction, Redundancy Remov al, Data storage, Data 
Handling, Data Query, Data Representation and Exploration  
Text Books  
646 
 
1. Kotu, V. and Deshpande, B. (2018) Data Science: Concepts and Practice, 
Morgan Kaufmann.  
2. Saltz, J.S. and Stanton, J.M. (2017) An Introduction to Data Science, SAGE 
Publications.  
3. Kelleher, J. D., and Tierney, (2018) Data Science, MIT Press Reference Books  
 
Reference Books 
1. Moreira, J., Carvalho, A. and Horvath, T. (2018) A General Introduction  to 
Data Analytics, John Wiley & Sons.  
2. Mayer-Schonberger, V. and Cukier, K., (2013) Big data: The essential guide 
to work, life and learning in the age of insight, John Murray Publications.  
  Fractal 2: Qualitative and Quantitative Analyses (DHL7XX2) 
 
Introduction: Research Question, Research Design, an introduction to research 
methods in digital humanities and mapping the departure from traditiona l research 
methods [2 lectures] 
Overview of Research Methods: Quantitative data collection and analysis, Survey 
design and analysis; Interviews, focus groups and participant observation; 
Discourse and Content Analysis [3 lectures]          
Research Methods in Digital Humanities: Case Studies and projects in Digital 
Humanities; Research method as discipline - how digital humanities has been 
expanding through deployment of digital methods to study society, culture, 
philosophy and language [4 lectures] 
Techniques of data collection and analysis: Document Image Processing, OCR 
Techniques and its challenges, NLP Introduction, and its applications, Qualitative 
Analysis - Themes, Patterns, Coding using NVivo and MaxQDA [5 lectures] 
References Books 
1. Bryman, Alan (2014), Social Science Research Methods, Oxford University 
Press: Oxford. 
2. Levenberg, Nielsen, Tai, et. al.  (2018), Research Methods for Digital 
Humanities, Palgrave Macmillan: New York.  
Fractal 3: Visualization Analysis and Design (DHL7XX3) 
Introduction: Design Effectiveness, Abstraction (Data and Task), Marks and 
Channels, Analysis and Validation [7 lectures] 
Interaction Design: Arranging data, Spatial data, Network and Trees, Map Color and 
Other Channels, Views, Applications, User Experience [ 7 Lectures] 
 
Hands-on Exercises 
647 
 
1. Visualizing Quantitative and Qualitative Data. 
2. Use case-based user experience design. 
  
References Books 
1. William Lidwell, Kritina Holden, Jill Butler (2010), Universal Principles of 
Design, Rockport Publishers. 
2. Tamara Munzner (2014), Visualization Analysis & Design, CRC Press. 
 
Online-course material 
1. Data Science and Visualization, Provided by Harvard University (HarvardX), 
https://www.edx.org/course/data-science-visualization-2 
2. NPTEL Course, Data Visualization in R, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106106179/11 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
648 
 
Title Selected Topics in Digital Humanities - I Number DHL7XX0 
Department IDRP-DH L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 
Offered for M.Tech. (Cr>=14)  
Ph.D. (Cr>0) 
Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Expose the students to the latest upcoming fields in the area of Digital Humanities 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply the knowledge of recent topics to specific research areas in the field of Digital 
Humanities  
 
Contents  
The topic clouds for the course include contemporary topics in Digital Humanities and 
may be updated according to the instructor. 
 
Textbook  
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
 
 
649 
 
Title Selected Topics in Digital Humanities - II Number DHL7XX0 
Department IDRP-DH L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 
Offered for M.Tech. (Cr>=14)  
Ph.D. (Cr>0) 
Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Expose the students to the latest upcoming fields in the area of Digital Humanities  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply the knowledge of recent topics to specific research areas in the field of Digital 
Humanities  
 
Contents  
The topic clouds for the course include contemporary topics in Digital Humanities and 
may be updated according to the instructor. 
 
Textbook  
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
 
 
 
650 
 
Title Selected Topics in Digital Humanities - III Number DHL7XX0 
Department IDRP-DH L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. (Cr>=14)  
Ph.D. (Cr>0) 
Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Expose the students to the latest upcoming fields in the area of Digital Humanities 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply the knowledge of recent topics to specific research areas in the field of Digital 
Humanities 
Contents  
The topic clouds for the course include contemporary topics in Digital Humanities and may be 
updated according to the instructor. 
Textbook  
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
Self-Learning Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
Preparatory Course Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
651 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DH Electives 
  
652 
 
Title Fundamentals of Digital Humanities Number DHL7XX0 
Department IDRP-DH L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Prerequisite  None     
 Objectives 
4. Introduce and explore a broad spectrum of perspectives on the Digital 
Humanities 
5. Develop familiarity with a range of Digital Humanities projects, as well as the 
ability to evaluate the tools and methods involved in creating and analysing 
those projects 
6. Critical and reflexive use of digital tools, technologies, and spaces by 
understanding that all technologies are complex and socially situated, through 
which humans make meaning 
  
Learning Outcomes  
7. Appreciate and critically discuss Digital Humanities projects in light of current 
methods and theoretical approaches to the field 
8. Explain how Digital Humanities methods and practices are applied in different 
disciplines 
9. Skillset to plan, develop, and evaluate a Digital Humanities research project 
  
Fractal Course Contents  
  
Fractal 1: Digital Humanities: Emerging Contours (DHL7XX1) [1-0-0] 
  
Introduction: What is Digital Humanities, Evolution of classical disciplines into Digital 
Humanities 
Digital Cultural Heritage; Conceptualising DH projects; Interdisciplinary style of 
proposal writing [4 Lectures]  
Computational Humanities [3 Lectures]  
Digital Embodiment: Embodied Identities in Digital Society; Bias and Privilege – 
Marginalised Histories; Cyborgs, Gender, Space, and Place in Digital Societies [4 
Lectures]  
653 
 
Literature and Technology, Text Analysis, Data Visualisation [3 Lectures]  
  
Hands-on Exercises 
3. Identifying DH projects from traditional projects: Concrete examples and a 
range of approaches to DH from the traditional disciplines.  
4. Digital Humanities Project Critiques: Exploring the project goals, what type of 
data it used, how that data was found and/or transformed, what technologies 
were used, and why.  
5.  
References Books 
4. Gere, C., (2008), Digital Culture, 2nd Edition, London: Reaktion Books Limited 
5. Bentkowska-Kafel, A., Cashen, T., and Gardiner, H. (Eds.) (2009), Digital Visual 
Culture: Theory and Practice, Bristol and Chicago: Intellect Books 
6. Karaganis, J. (Ed.), (2007), Structures of Participation in Digital Culture, Social 
Science Research Council, Columbia University Press 
 
Online-course material 
Digital Humanities Seminar Video Archive of the Open University, UK, 
http://www.open.ac.uk/arts/research/digital-humanities/videos 
 
Fractal 2: Data and Knowledge representations (DHL7XX2) [1-0-0] 
 
Introduction: Data Sources, Transcribing (Multimedia data), Conversation, Discourse 
Analysis [7 lectures] 
Knowledge Engineering: Ontological engineering, Representation of Ontologies, 
Common Logic, RDFS, Web Ontology Language (OWL), Topic Maps, Multimedia Web 
Ontology Language, Applications [ 7 Lectures] 
  
Hands-on Exercises 
3. Ethnographic data collection and analysis: A case study 
4. Ontology formation from Multimedia Data: A case study 
 
References Books 
4. Christopher Joseph Jenks (2011), Transcribing Talk and Interaction: Issues in 
the Representation of Communication Data, John Benjamins Publishing 
Company. 
5. Russel, S. & Norvig, P., (2009), Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, 
654 
 
Pearson Education 
6. S. Chaudhury, A. Mallik, and H. Ghogh (2016), Multim edia Ontology 
Representation and Applications, CRC Press. 
Online-Course Materials 
2. Knowledge Representation and Reasoning  
http://videolectures.net/ssll09_pagnucco_krr/ 
http://videolectures.net/eswc2018_rudolph_knowledge_representation/ 
 
Fractal 3: Digital Archives (DHL7XX3) [1-0-0] 
  
Digital memory, Methods of archiving, Theorizing the archive, database [6 lectures] 
Exhibition, installation, audio-visual essays [4 lectures]  
Aesthetics of recreation/ Digital aesthetics, Digital Art [4 lectures]  
  
References Books 
3. Ernst, W., (2013), Digital Memory and the Archive, Minneapolis: University of 
Minnesota Press  
4. Grau, O., Coones, W., and Ruhse, V. (Eds.) (2017), Museum and Archive on the 
Move: Changing Cultural Institutions in the Digital Era, Berlin and Boston: De 
Gruyter  
 
Online-course material 
2. https://indiancine.ma/  
 
  
655 
 
Title Digital Methods and Tools Number DHL7XX0 
Department IDRP-DH L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Prerequisite  None     
  
Objectives 
4. Introduce and explore avenues of new and emerging societal and cultural 
entities and methodologies in Digital Humanities.  
5. Provide a conceptual foundation that will allow students to engage critically 
with Digital Humanities research and methods. 
6. Provide basic training digital and computational tools and techniques that can 
enhance students‟ own research. 
Learning Outcomes  
4. Fundamental understanding of research tools that will help students plan for 
and evaluate the effectiveness of Digital Humanities methods including a 
multitude of platforms such as social media and web tools. 
5. Understand what data mean in different contexts 
6. Capture, collect, and analyse a variety of data types related to Digital 
Humanities research project  
 
Fractal Course Contents  
  
Fractal 1: Introduction to Data Science (DHL7XX1) 
 
Components of Fractal 1 from  Introduction to Data Science (M.Tech DCS 
Program) 
Data preparation, Data pre -processing, Data Cleaning, Data Integration, Data 
Transformation, Data Reduction, Redundancy Remov al, Data storage, Data 
Handling, Data Query, Data Representation and Exploration [14 lectures] 
 
656 
 
Text Books  
4. Kotu, V. and Deshpande, B. (2018) Data Science: Concepts and Practice, 
Morgan Kaufmann.  
5. Saltz, J.S. and Stanton, J.M. (2017) An Introduction to Data Science, SAGE 
Publications.  
6. Kelleher, J. D., and Tierney, (2018) Data Science, MIT Press Reference Books  
 
Reference Books 
3. Moreira, J., Carvalho, A. and Horvath, T. (2018) A General Introduction  to 
Data Analytics, John Wiley & Sons.  
4. Mayer-Schonberger, V. and Cukier, K., (2013) Big data: The essential guide 
to work, life and learning in the age of insight, John Murray Publications.  
   
 
 
Fractal 2: Qualitative and Quantitative Analyses (DHL7XX2) [1-0-0] 
 
Introduction: Research Question, Research Design, an introduction to research 
methods in digital humanities and mapping the departure from traditional research 
methods [2 lectures] 
 
Overview of Research Methods: Quantitative data collection and an alysis, Survey 
design and analysis; Interviews, focus groups and participant observation; 
Discourse and Content Analysis [3 lectures]  
          
Research Methods in Digital Humanities: Case Studies and projects in Digital 
Humanities; Research method as discipline - how digital humanities has been 
expanding through deployment of digital methods to study society, culture, 
philosophy and language [4 lectures] 
 
Techniques of data collection and analysis: Document Image Processing, OCR 
Techniques and its chal lenges, NLP Introduction, and its applications, Qualitative 
Analysis - Themes, Patterns, Coding using NVivo and MaxQDA [5 lectures] 
  
References Books 
 
657 
 
3. Bryman, Alan (2014), Social Science Research Methods, Oxford University 
Press: Oxford. 
4. Levenberg, Nielse n, Tai, et. al. (2018), Research Methods for Digital 
Humanities, Palgrave Macmillan: New York.  
  
  
Fractal 3: Visualization Analysis and Design (DHL7XX3) [1-0-0] 
 
Introduction: Design Effectiveness, Abstraction (Data and Task), Marks and 
Channels, Analysis and Validation [7 lectures] 
 
Interaction Design: Arranging data, Spatial data, Network and Trees, Map Color and 
Other Channels, Views, Applications, User Experience [ 7 Lectures] 
 
Hands-on Exercises 
3. Visualizing Quantitative and Qualitative Data. 
4. Use case-based user experience design. 
  
References Books 
3. William Lidwell, Kritina Holden, Jill Butler (2010), Universal Principles of 
Design, Rockport Publishers. 
4. Tamara Munzner (2014), Visualization Analysis & Design, CRC Press. 
 
Online-course material 
3. Data Science and Visualization, Provided by Harvard University (HarvardX), 
https://www.edx.org/course/data-science-visualization-2 
4. NPTEL Course, Data Visualization in R, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106106179/11 
 
  
 
 
 
Title Selected Topics in Digital Humanities - I Number DHL8XX0 
658 
 
Department IDRP-DH L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite DHL7XX0 Fundamentals of Digital Humanities 
OR 
DHL7XX0 Digital Methods and Tools 
  
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Expose the students to the latest upcoming fields in the area of Digital Humanities 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply the knowledge of recent topics to specific research areas in the field of Digital 
Humanities  
 
Contents  
The topic clouds for the course include contemporary topics in Digital Humanities and 
may be updated according to the instructor. 
 
Textbook  
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
  
659 
 
Title Selected Topics in Digital Humanities - II Number DHL8XX0 
Department IDRP-DH L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite DHL7XX0 Fundamentals of Digital Humanities 
OR 
DHL7XX0 Digital Methods and Tools 
  
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Expose the students to the latest upcoming fields in the area of Digital Humanities 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply the knowledge of recent topics to specific research areas in the field of Digital 
Humanities  
 
Contents  
The topic clouds for the course include contemporary topics in Digital Humanities and 
may be updated according to the instructor. 
 
Textbook  
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
 
660 
 
Title Selected Topics in Digital Humanities - III Number DHL8XX0 
Department IDRP-DH L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite DHL7XX0 Fundamentals of Digital Humanities 
OR 
DHL7XX0 Digital Methods and Tools 
  
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Expose the students to the latest upcoming fields in the area of Digital Humanities 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply the knowledge of recent topics to specific research areas in the field of Digital 
Humanities 
 
Contents  
The topic clouds for the course include contemporary topics in Digital Humanities and may be 
updated according to the instructor. 
 
Textbook  
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
 
 
661 
 
 
 
 
 
Ph.D. Programme 
 
In 
 
Quantum Information and Computation (QIC) 
 
Inter Disciplinary Research Platform 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
662 
 
Title Introduction to Quantum 
Information 
Number QCL6XX0 
Department IDRP (QC) L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide fundamentals of quantum information and computation 
2. Impart the knowledge of modeling efficiencies of a protocol in real experimental 
conditions 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
1. Use the concepts taught in class to various aspects of quantum information, 
communication and cryptography 
2. Understand and appreciate the technological evolution at theoretical and experimental 
front in QIC 
 
Contents  
QCL6XX1: Quantum entanglement and non-locality [1-0-0] 
Quantum Entanglement, correlations and Separability:  Review of linear algebra and 
basic laws of quantum mechanics, concept of bits and qubits, quantum gates, quantum 
parallelism, quantum algorithms, density operators and its applications 
Classical and quantum correlations, separability criterion, separable and entangled 
states, measures of two -qubit and multiqubit entanglement, Bell -type inequalities, 
discord (14 Lectures) 
  
QCL6XX2: Noise and Applications of Entanglement [2-0-0] 
Quantum Noise : Classical and Markov Processes, Quantum Operations, Examples of 
Quantum Noise and Quantum Operations, Applications of Quantum Operations, 
Limitations of the Quantum Operations Formalism (7 Lectures) 
Applications: Cryptography, quantum teleportation, dense coding, entanglement 
swapping, secret sharing, quantum games (14 Lectures))  
Effects of noise on quantum information and computation (7 Lectures) 
  
Textbooks 
1. Nielsen, M. A. and Chuang, I. L., (2000) Quantum Computation and Quantum 
Information, 10th edition, Cambridge University Press. 
2. Vedral, V., (2006) Introduction to Quantum Information Science, 1st edition, Oxford 
University Press 
 
Reference Books 
1. Griffiths, D. J., (2006) Introduction to Quantum Mechanics, 2nd edition, Pearson 
Prentice Hall. 
2. Bouwmeester, D., Ekert, A. and Zeilinger, A., (2000) The Physics of Quantum 
Information, 2nd edition, Springer. 
3. Bellac, M. L., (2006) A Short Introduction to Quantum Information and Quantum 
Computation, 1st edition, Cambridge University Press. 
Self Learning Material  
1. Goswami, D., Quantum Computing, Mathematics for Chemistry, NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur 
     https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc18_cy07/preview 
 
 
 
 
663 
 
Title Quantum Computing Number QCL7XX0 
Department IDRP (QC) L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Impart mathematical framework of Quantum Computation to students familiar with 
basic concepts of quantum mechanics and quantum information 
2. Discuss advanced topics and State-of-the-Art research in quantum information and 
computation (QIC) 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
1. Use the concepts taught in class to various aspects of quantum information,     
communication and cryptography 
2. Understand and appreciate the technological evolution at theoretical and experimental 
front in QIC 
 
Contents  
Mathematical Preliminaries:  Quantum Mechanics, Matrix representations of quantum 
states and operators, Cauchy-Schwartz and Triangle Inequalities, Classical and Quantum 
Correlations (6 Lectures) 
Notions of Quantum Information: Classical and Quantum state Registers, Pure and Mixed 
states, Reduction and Purification of states, Quantum Channels, Completely Positive and 
trace Preserving Maps (6 Lectures) 
Entropy: Quantitative bounds on Shannon and relative Entropy, Von -Neumann and 
quantum relative entropy, Klein‟s inequality, Concavity an d subadditivity of von 
Neumann entropy, Strong subadditivity of von Neumann entropy, Accessible 
Information, Holevo information (8 Lectures) 
Entanglement and Nonlocality:  Separability Criteria, Classical, Separable and Entangled 
states, Local Operations an d Classical Communications, Distillable entanglement and 
entanglement cost, Bound entanglement, Bell‟s Inequality and Nonlocality, Nonlocality in 
multiqubit Systems, Entanglement Measures (12 Lectures) 
Quantum Error Correction:  Bit flip and phase flip code s, Quantum Hamming Bound, 
Calderbank-Shor-Steane codes, Gottesman -Knil theorem, Fault -tolerant quantum 
computation, quantum algorithms and cryptography (10 Lectures)    
 
Textbooks 
1. Nielsen, M. A. and Chuang, I. L., Quantum Computation and Quantum Information, 
Cambridge University Press, 2000 
2. Vedral, V., Introduction to Quantum Information Science, Oxford University Press, 
2006 
 
Reference Books 
1. Griffiths, D. J., Introduction to Quantum Mechanics, Pearson Prentice Hall, 2006 
2. Bouwmeester, D., Ekert, A. and Zeilinger, A., The Physics of Quantum Information, 
Springer, 2000 
3.  
Self Learning Material  
1.Goswami, D., Quantum Computing, Mathematics for Chemistry, NPTEL Course 
Material, Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur 
     https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc18_cy07/preview 
 
 
 
 
664 
 
Title Facets  of Quantum Information Number QCL7XX0 
Department IDRP (QC) L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
 The Instructor will: 
1.   Provide an appreciation for the classical and quantum aspects of information theory. 
2. Help in developing an understanding of the exciting world of quantum computation 
and information 
  
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.   Understand the fundamental principles of quantum information. 
2.   Appreciate  some modern applications of quantum mechanics. 
  
       Contents  
Review of basics of quantum information and computation (4 Lectures) 
 
Entanglement and Separability criterion, Entanglement me asures, Purification and 
distillation, multi qubit entanglement, nonlocal correlations, multi qubit Bell -type 
inequalities (12 Lectures) 
 
Quantum Computation: Quantum logic gates; quantum Fourier transform; quantum 
algorithm; physical realization of quantum computers ( 8 Lectures) 
 
Classical Information and Communication: What is information and how can it be used? 
Concepts of communication channels; Shannon entropy; coding theory and 
communication complexity. (8 Lectures) 
 
Quantum Information: What is info rmation theory from the perspective of quantum 
mechanics? Quantum entropy; quantum mutual information; fidelity. (6 Lectures)  
 
Some Unconventional Models of Computing: Brief introduction to cellular computation 
and communication; chaos based computing; DNA computing.  (4 Lectures) 
  
 
Textbook:  
 
1. Nielsen Michael, A. and Chuang   Isaac , I., Quantum Computation and Quantum 
Information,   Cambridge University Press, 2010. 
 
Self-Learning Material: 
1.Ghosh, D., Quantum Information and Computing, Indian Institute of Technology 
Bombay, https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/115101092/. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
665 
 
Title Quantum Cryptography and 
Coding 
Number QCL6XX0 
Department IDRP (QC) L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
 The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce the students to the fascinating field of cryptography and coding, with 
specific emphasis on the quantum aspects of it. 
2. Highlight a number of facets of these theories having some parallel with the more 
familiar classical world. 
  
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
        1.Understand the fundamental principles of quantum cryptography and coding.  
 2.Become familiar with the modern aspects of the theory, including its experimental 
implementation. 
 
Contents  
What is cryptography? Various aspects of modern cryptography; number theoretic 
concepts. 
Classical Coding Theory: Concepts of entropy, mutual in formation and related aspects; 
Shannon's coding theorem.  (10 Lectures) 
 
Basic concepts of Quantum Mechanics: From the perspective of information and 
cryptography:  Hilbert space, states, operators: Hermitian and Unitary, simple 
measurements. (5 Lectures) 
 
Some basic no-go theorems: With implications to cryptography. (2 Lectures) 
 
Some basic applications pertinent to quantum cryptography: Entanglement, 
teleportation, dense coding. (6 Lectures) 
 
Various Quantum Cryptography protocols: Quantum Key Distributio n protocols: BB84, 
B92, Ekert protocol, Goldenberg -Vaidman, counterfactual quantum cryptography; 
protocols of quantum dialogue; Quantum secret sharing protocol; Quantum cheating and 
cryptography; Protecting information and QKA (quantum key agreement); Shor 's 
factoring algorithm and modern cryptography; Experimental progress in quantum 
cryptography. (15 Lectures) 
 
Quantum Coding: Quantum aspects of Shannon coding theorem. (4 Lectures) 
 
Textbook:  
1. Nielsen Michael, A. and Chuang   Isaac , I., Quantum Computation and Quantum 
Information,   Cambridge University Press, 2010. 
  
Self-Learning Material: 
1.MIT Open Course, 18.435J  “Quantum Computation”, by Shor. P.;  Fall 2003, 
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/mathematics/18-435j-quantum-computation-fall-2003/ 
 
  
666 
 
 
 
 
Ph.D. Programme 
 
In 
 
Smart Healthcare 
 
Inter Disciplinary Research Platform 
 
  
667 
 
PhD program in IDRP Smart healthcare 
1. Introduction: 
The Smart Health Care IDRP aspires to create significant scientific and technological 
advancements in the area of Healthcare by bringing together a multidisciplinary team of 
scientists working in the int erface of Biology, Chemistry, healthcare & Engineering. The 
research is intended to focus on designing and developing sustainable solutions for 
point-of-care health devices, drug discovery, affordable diagnostics, bio -compatible 
implants, and remote health  care, including telemedicine. The IDRP platform is expected 
to support the development of various eHealth and mHealth based solutions for 
improving the quality of healthcare and making it available to large segments of the 
society. 
 
2. The major objectives are: 
 Augmenting existing methods for medical research using machine learning and 
artificial intelligence based approaches 
 Designing new and optimizing existing point-of-care health devices  
 Identifying novel methods for early diagnosis and personalized treatments 
 Creating a platform to use various electronic, mechanical, and bio -sensors for 
improving the remote health care facilities  
 
3. Expected Graduate Attributes 
Graduates will 
1. Be able to think critically and solve problems that are necessary for employ ment 
in biomedical, biotechnology, pharmaceutical industries, National research labs 
and Academic institutions at the global level. 
2. Develop a sense of ownership on the National missions for technology 
development, which will cater to societal needs in the area of affordable 
healthcare. 
3. Be exceptionally well trained in the laboratory enabling them to conduct high -
quality, reproducible research. 
4. Be able to read, understand and review intellectual property documents and 
recognize their rights. 
5. Be able to express their research ideas and present their data clearly in written 
and spoken format. 
6. Develop a strong work ethic and understand ethical considerations in biological 
research, which are both necessary for high-quality research. 
7. Develop healthy time man agement skills to plan and manage laboratory work as 
well as other miscellaneous research -associated demands on their time to 
effectively meet deadlines. 
668 
 
4.  Learning outcome: 
Graduates will 
• Be introduced to cutting -edge, interdisciplinary research areas like  Diagnostics & 
Therapeutics development, Machine learning and Artificial Intelligence for 
healthcare, Novel drug development, Biomedical Instrumentation design,   
Biomedical Imaging& Image processing, Systems & Synthetic Biology, Biosensors 
and Biomaterials Engineering. 
• Be exposed to common problems that are prevalent in the domains of affordable 
healthcare such as sustainable point of care diagnostic devices, personalized 
medicine, remote healthcare, bioimaging for specific diagnosis, and medical 
devices & implants  
• Receive effective, hands -on laboratory training as a part of laboratory courses 
and short -term research projects that are designed to teach research 
methodology and common lab techniques. 
• Be introduced to Patents and other intellectual property documents, the rights 
that they grant and necessary considerations while filing patents / technology 
that is protected by patents. 
• Develop their research communication skills by participating in seminars, journal 
clubs; manuscript writing and research grant writing workshops. 
• Receive training on building a work ethic by being a part of research groups 
working towards a common goal. Graduates will also appreciate the ethical and 
safety considerations while conducting biomedical research. 
• Be taught how to prioritize items on their schedule and how to budget time across 
the spectrum of activities including research and other necessary tasks. 
5. Essential Topic clouds 
Drug  
Development 
Point of care 
diagnostic device 
Systems 
Biology 
Artificial 
Intelligence & 
Machine 
learning 
Biomedical 
devices & 
implants 
Searching 
Microbiomes for 
novel antimicrobials 
 
Organic synthesis 
 
Drug screening & 
testing 
Sensor materials 
 
Biomarkers 
 
Biomolecular 
interactions 
 
Surface 
Immuno-
technology 
 
Disease 
processes 
diagnostics 
therapeutics 
 
Synthetic Biology 
Machine learning 
Artificial 
Intelligence 
Tissue 
engineering 
 
Biomechanics 
 
Artificial Organs 
 
669 
 
 
Animal Models 
 
Personalized 
medicine 
 
AI for healthcare 
 
 
 
functionalization 
 
Sensor 
development 
 
Qualitative and 
Quantitative Assay 
 
Biosignals 
 
Biosignal 
Processing 
 
Vaccine 
development 
 
Identification of 
novel biomarkers 
 
Understanding 
disease 
development 
Biomaterials 
 
 
 
6. Program Structure 
Cat Course Title L-T-P Credits  Cat Course Title L-T-P Credits 
I Semester   II Semester 
PE Elective 1 3-0-0 3 
 
PE Elective 1 3-0-0 3 
PE 
Elective 2 
 
3-0-0 3 
 
PE 
Elective 2 
 
3-0-0 3 
PE Elective 3 3-0-0 3 
 
PE Elective 3 3-0-0 3 
PE Elective 3 3-0-0 3 
 
PE Elective 3 3-0-0 3 
         
Total  12  Total (Graded + Non-graded) 12 
III Semester  IV Semester 
PE Elective 2-0-0 2      
670 
 
TH Thesis 0-0-
20 10  TH Thesis 0-0-24 12 
Total 12  Total 12 
V Semester  VI Semester 
TH Thesis 0-0-
24 12  TH Thesis 0-0-24 12 
Total 12  Total 12 
VII Semester  VIII Semester 
TH Thesis 0-0-4 2      
Total  2    
7. Credit Requirements for the degree 
Credit requirements 
Student with M Sc Students with M Tech Students with B Tech 
Course work credits 30 
Thesis 48 
 
Course work 12 
Thesis 48 
Course work credits 30 
Thesis 48 
 
 
 
 
  
671 
 
Courses 
(In addition to the courses mentioned below, a student can opt for any course floated in other IDRP 
programs relevant to the thesis) 
 
Title Software and Data Engineering Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.  Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Discuss techniques to manage a large amount of data 
2.  Provide mechanisms to design and develop data-intensive computing systems 
 
Learning Outcomes  
     The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Design complex end-to-end data pipeline for data processing 
2.  Critically identify and use the tools for data handling and management 
3.  Use modern software technologies to design and develop data analytical systems 
 
 
Contents 
CSL7XX0 Cloud Computing and Virtualization 1-0-0 [1] 
Basics of complex software design: Concept of modular software, microservices, 
communication, 4+1 architectural views and patterns (5 lectures) 
Cloud Computing: Architecture of cluster computing, design of data centers, open data center 
platforms, fault-tolerant system design (5 lectures) 
Virtualization: Type-1 and Type-2 virtualization, virtual machine, containers, dockers (4 
lectures)  
CSL7XX0 Data Management 1-0-0 [1] 
Data Management: Structured data, relational database management, unstructured data, 
semi-structured data,  Nosql database management (mongodb), column database, graph 
database, XML, JSON, HDFS, Handling drift in data, sensor data reliability at software and  
algorithmic level, sensor data analysis techniques (14 lectures)  
CSL7XX0 Data Intensive Processing Systems 1-0-0 [1] 
Data Intensive Processing Systems: Architecture of large scale data processing systems, 
Hadoop, Apache Spark, Storm, parallel data processing concepts such as map-reduce, directed 
acyclic graph, resilient distributed datasets, dynamic resource allocation, partial & shared 
computation, storage architecture  (14 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1.  Bass L., Clements P., Kazman R., (2012), Software Architecture in Practice, 3rd edition, 
Addison-Wesley Professional 
2.  Martin K., (2017), Designing Data-Intensive Applications: The Big Ideas Behind Reliable, 
Scalable, and Maintainable Systems, 1st Edition, O'Reilly Media 
 
Self Learning Material  
1.  Tylor,R.N., Medvidovic,N. and Dashofy,E.M., (2014), Software Architecture Foundation: 
Theory and Practice, Wiley  
 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 
2. International Conference on Data Engineering  
 
672 
 
 
Title Algorithms for Big Data Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 
Offered for M.Tech. 1st Year, Ph.D. 1st Year  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives  
     The Instructor will:  
1.  Introduce some algorithmic techniques developed for handling large amounts of data.  
2.  Emphasize on both theoretical as well as practical aspects of such algorithms.  
Learning Outcomes  
     The students are expected to have the ability to:  
1.  Analyze existing algorithms as well as design novel algorithms pertaining to big data.  
 
Contents  
Sketching and Streaming: Extremely small-space data structures (4 lectures)  
 
Numerical linear algebra:  Algorithms for big matrices, Regression, Low -rank approximation, 
Matrix completion (8 lectures)  
 
Compressed Sensing: Sparse signals, Linear measurements, Signal recovery (8 lectures)  
 
External memory and cache -obliviousness: Minimizing I/O for large datasets, Algorithms and 
data structures such as B-trees, Buffer trees, Multiway mergesort (8 lectures)  
 
Reference Books  
Markovsky I, (2014), Low Rank Approximation: Algorithms, Implementation, Applications, 
Springer 
Eldar Y C., Kutyniok G. (2012), Compressed Sensing: Theory and Applications, Cambridge 
University Press.  
 
Self Learning Material  
1.   Department of Computer Science, Harvard University, Algorithms for Big Data  
 
 
 
 
  
673 
 
Title Machine Learning-1 Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. 1st Year, Ph.D. 1st Year Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite None    
 
Objectives  
     The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide motivation and understanding of the need and importance of Machine Learning 
in today‟s world  
2.  Provide details about various algorithms in Machine Learning  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Develop a sense of Machine Learning in the modern context, and independently work   
on problems relating to Machine Learning  
2. Design and program efficient algorithms related to Machine Learning, train models,  
conduct experiments, and deliver ML-based applications  
 
Contents  
 
CSL7XX1: Introduction to Machine Learning: Supervised Learning 1-0-0[1] 
Introduction: Motivation, Different types of learning, Linear regression, Logistic regression (2 
lectures)  
Gradient Descent:  Introduction, Stochastic Gradi ent Descent, Subgradients, Stochastic 
Gradient Descent for risk minimization (2 lectures)  
Support Vector Machines:  Hard SVM, Soft SVM, Optimality conditions, Duality, Kernel trick, 
Implementing Soft SVM with Kernels (4 lectures)  
Decision Trees: Decision Tree algorithms, Random forests (2 lectures)  
Neural Networks: Feedforward neural networks, Expressive power of neural networks, SGD 
and Backpropagation (3 lectures)  
Model selection and validation: Validation for model selection, k-fold cross-validation, Training-
Validation-Testing split, Regularized loss minimization (1 lectures)  
 
CSL7XX2: Introduction to Machine Learning: Unsupervised Learning and Generative 
Models 1-0-0[1] 
Nearest Neighbour: k-nearest neighbour, Curse of dimensionality (1 lecture)  
Clustering: Linkage-based clustering algorithms, k -means algorithm, Spectral clustering (3 
lectures)  
Dimensionality reduction:  Principal Component Analysis, Random projections, Compressed 
sensing (2 lectures)  
Generative Models: Maximum likelihood estimat or, Naive Bayes, Linear Discriminant Analysis, 
Latent variables and Expectation-maximization algorithm, Bayesian learning (5 lectures)  
Feature Selection and Generation: Feature selection, Feature transformations, Feature learning 
(3 lectures)  
CSL7XX3: In troduction to Machine Learning: Computational Learning Theory and 
Deep Learning 1-0-0[1] 
Statistical Learning Framework: PAC learning, Agnostic PAC learning, Bias -complexity tradeoff, 
No free lunch theorem, VC dimension, Structural risk minimization, Adaboost (7 lectures)  
Foundations of Deep Learning: DNN, CNN, RNN, Autoencoders (7 lectures)  
Textbook 
1. Shalev -Shwartz,S., Ben -David,S., (2014), Understanding Machine Learning: From 
Theory to Algorithms, Cambridge University Press  
 
Reference Books  
1. Mitchell Tom (1997). Machine Learning, Tata McGraw-Hill  
 
 
Self Learning Material  
674 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.   Department of Computer Science, Stanford University,  
      https://see.stanford.edu/Course/CS229  
675 
 
Title Machine Learning II Number CSL8XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. 1st Year, Ph.D. 1st Year Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Machine Learning-1   
 
Objectives  
     The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide technical details about various recent algorithms and software platforms related 
to Machine Learning with specific focus on Deep Learning.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.   Design and program efficient algorithms related to recent machine learning techniques,  
      train models, conduct experiments, and develop real-world ML-based applications and 
      products   
 
Contents  
CSL7XX1: Machine Learning II: Introduction to Deep Learning 1-0-0[1] 
Model Search: Optimization, Regularization, AutoML (4 lectures)  
Deep Networks: Attention layers, Gated CNNs, Graph Neural Networks (8 lectures)  
Applications: Neural language models (2 lectures)  
 
CSL7XX2: Machine Learning II: Repr esentation Learning & Structured Models 1 -0-
0[1] 
Representation Learning: Unsupervised pre-training, transfer learning and domain adaptation, 
distributed representation, discovering underlying causes (7 lectures)  
Structured models:  learning about dependen cies, inference and approximate inference, 
sampling and Monte Carlo Methods, Importance Sampling, Gibbs Sampling, Partition Function, 
MAP inference and Sparse Coding, Variational Inference (7 lectures)  
 
CSL7XX3: Machine Learning II: Deep Generative Models 1-0-0[1] 
Deep Generative Models: Deep Belief Networks, Variational Autoencoder, Generative 
Adversarial Network (GAN), Deep Convolutional GAN, Autoencoder GANs, iGAN, pix2pix, 
CycleGAN, Conditional GANs, StackGAN (14 lectures)  
 
Laboratory Experiments  
Overview of Deep Learning platforms such Tensorflow and PyTorch.  
 
Textbook 
1.Goodfellow,I., Bengio.,Y., and Courville,A., (2016), Deep Learning, The MIT Press  
 
Reference Books  
1. Charniak, E. (2019), Introduction to deep learning, The MIT Press.  
 
Self Learning Material  
1.   https://www.deeplearningbook.org/  
  
676 
 
 
Title Artificial Intelligence I Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. 1st Year, Ph.D. 1st Year  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives  
     The Instructor will: 
1.  Cover various paradigms that come under the broad umbrella of AI. 
  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to:  
1.  Develop an understanding of where and how AI can be used. 
 
Contents  
Introduction (1 lecture)  
Propositional logic (8 lectures)  
Search: Uninformed strategies (BFS, DFS, Dijkstra), Informed strategies (A* search, heuristic  
functions, hill-climbing), Adversarial search (Minimax algorithm, Alpha-beta pruning) (10  
lectures)  
Predicate logic: Knowledge representation, Resolution (6 lectures)  
Rule-based systems: Natural language parsing, Context free grammar (3 lectures)  
Constraint satisfaction problems (4 lectures)  
Planning: State space search, Planning Graphs, Partial order planning (4 lectures)  
Uncertain Reasoning: Probabilistic reasoning, Bayesian Networks, Dempster-Shafer theory,  
Fuzzy logic (6 lectures)  
 
Textbook  
1.Russel,S., and Norvig,P., (2015), Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, 3rd Edition,  
      Prentice Hall 
 
Reference Books  
1. Research literature  
 
Self Learning Material  
1.   Department of Computer Science, University of California, Berkeley,  
      http://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLD52D2B739E4D1C5F  
2.   NPTEL: Artificial Intelligence, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106105077/  
 
  
677 
 
Title Artificial Intelligence II Number CSL8XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. 1st Year, Ph.D. 1st Year  Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Artificial Intelligence-1   
 
Objectives  
     The Instructor will: 
1.  Cover modern paradigms of AI that go beyond traditional learning.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
     The students are expected to have the ability to:  
1.  Develop an understanding of modern concepts in AI and where they can be used. 
2.  Design, implement and apply novel AI techniques based on emerging real-world  
     requirements. 
 
Contents  
CSL8XX1: Artificial Intelligence: Probabilistic Reasoning and Knowledge 
Representation 1-0-0[1] 
Probabilistic Reasoning over time: Hidden Markov Models, Kalman Filters, Dynamic  
Bayesian Networks (7 lectures)  
Knowledge Representation: Ontological engineering, Semantic Networks, Description Logics  
(7 lectures)  
 
CSL8XX1: Artificial Intelligence: Making Decisions 1-0-0[1] 
Making decisions: Utility theory, utility functions, decision networks, sequential  
decision problems, Partially Observable MDPs, Game Theory (14 lectures)  
 
CSL8XX1: Artificial Intelligence: Reinforcement Learning 1-0-0[1] 
Reinforcement Learning: Passive RL, Active RL, Generalization in RL, Policy 
Search, Deep Reinforcement Learning (14 lectures)  
 
Textbook  
1.Russel,S., and Norvig,P., (2015), Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, 3rd Edition,  
      Prentice Hall 
 
Reference Books  
1. Yang, Q. (1997), Intelligent Planning: A decomposition and abstraction based approach, 
Springer Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg.    
 
  
678 
 
Title Mechanical Behavior of Materials Number MTL7320 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–2-0 
[4] 
Offered for M.Tech. and Ph.D. Type Elective  
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives 
1. To provide background on the mechanisms of deformation in engineering materials, 
and on the evolution of material microstructure when subjected to mechanical 
stress during materials processing and engineering applications 
  
Learning Outcomes 
1. Ability to design materials with improved mechanical properties and identify failure 
mechanisms in materials for engineering applications 
2. To measure important mechanical properties and correlate with the microstructure 
  
Contents 
Continuum Theory of Deformation: 3D-state of stress and strain, Mohr‟s Circle, Generalized 
Hooke‟s Law and introductory theory of elasticity, stress and strain invariants, Yield 
Criteria, Yield surface and normality (6 lectures) 
Defects in Crystals:  Vacancies and interstitials, edge, screw and mixed dislocations, 
Burgers vector, slip, cross -slip and climb, stress fields around edge and screw 
dislocations, strain energy of dislocations, dislocation -dislocation interaction: Peach -
Koehler force on dislocation, image forces, dislocations in different crystal structures (10 
lectures) 
Twinning in Crystalline Solids:  Deformation twinning, geometry of twin formation, twin 
shape, stress requirement for twinning, twinning in HCP, BCC, and FCC crystals (4 
lectures) 
Fracture and Toughening Mechanisms: Theoretical fracture strength of a material and 
Griffith’s Law, modes of fracture, fracture toughness, G and R -curve, brittle and ductile 
fracture, toughening mechanisms in metals, ceramics, and polymers (8 lectures) 
Fatigue and Creep: Introduction to fatigue, stress and strain -life approach, cyclic stress -
strain curve, fatigue crack propagation, high temperature deformation, fatigue -creep 
interaction (8 lectures) 
Deformation of Polymers: Elasticity in dilute and semi -dilute polymer networks, nonlinear 
elastic deformation, rubber elasticity: Mooney-Rivlin and Ogden models (6 lectures) 
Laboratory Experiments 
Measurement of uniaxial monotonic stress -strain response of metals, ceramics, and polymers, 
Measurement of hardne ss via spherical and Vickers indentation and correlation with yield 
strength for ductile and brittle materials, The effect of grain size on mechanical properties, The 
effects of strain rate and temperature on yield strength, Recrystallization of cold rolle d metals, 
Measurement of impact fracture toughness using Charpy/Izod impact test, Fracture surface 
interpretation,  Creep of a 60%Sn-40%Pb Solder wire at room temperature. 
Text Books 
1. Dieter, G.E. (1986), Mechanical Metallurgy, 3rd Edition, McGraw-Hill Book Company. 
2. Courtney, T. H., (2005), Mechanical Behaviour of Materials , 2nd Edition, Waveland 
Press Inc. 
3. Shetty, M. N., (2013), Dislocations and Mechanical Behavior of Materials , Prentice 
Hall India Learning Private Limited 
  
Self-Learning Materials 
1. Hertzberg, R.W., (1976), Deformation and Fracture Mechanics of Engineering 
Materials, John Wiley and Sons 
2. McClintock,F.A., and Argon,A.S., (1966), Mechanical Behavior of Materials , Addison-
Wesley. 
 
679 
 
Title Frontiers  in Organic Chemistry Number CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Give an in-depth exposure to the latest advances in organic synthesis 
2. Inculcating in students a research-oriented approach towards solving synthetic organic 
chemistry problems 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Advance their knowledge in strategizing and synthesis of complex organic compounds  
2. Systematically read, understand and interpret the research reported in journals 
3. Develop skills of scientific presentations and interpersonal skills  
 
Contents 
Protecting Group: Selectivity and requirement of protecting groups, protecting groups and 
their deprotection (5 lectures) 
Advanced Radical Chemistry: Radical substitution reactions, coupling reactions, radical 
mediated cyclizations, addition reaction involving radicals, radical chain reactions (5 
lectures) 
Cycloaddition Reactions: 1,3-dipolar cycloadditions, higher order cycloadditions, asymmetric 
cycloadditions. (5 lectures) 
Advanced Enolate Chemistry: Diastereoselective aldol reactions, Evan‟s chiral auxiliary, 
Ender‟s chiral auxiliary, diastereofacial selectivity, asymmetric aldol reactions, 
Organocatalyzed aldol reactions (7 lectures) 
Total synthesis of complex molecules: total synthesis of penicillin, estrone, sparteine, 
prostaglandins, synthesis of important pharmaceuticals (12 lectures) 
C-H functionalization and C-H activation: Transition metal free reactions, Pd, Cu, Rh  
catalyzed C-H activation reactions, remote C-H functionalization and activation reactions (8 
lectures)  
 
Text books 
1. Carriera, E.M., and Kvaerno,L., (2009), Classics in Stereoselective synthesis, Wiley-VCH 
2. Kurti,L., Czako,B., (2005), Strategic Applications of Named Reactions in Organic 
Synthesis, Elsevier 
3. Carey,F.A., Sundberg,R.J., (2007), Advanced Organic Chemistry, Part B: Reactions and 
Synthesis, 5th Edition, Plenum 
 
Reference books  
1. Hudlicky,T., and Reed,J.W., (2007) The Way of Synthesis, Wiley-VCH 
2. Nicolaou,K.C., and Snyder,S.A., (2003), Classics in Total Synthesis-II: Further Targets, 
Strategies, Methods, Wiley-VCH 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Punniyamurthy,T., Catalytic Asymmetric Synthesis, NPTEL Course Material, Department 
of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104103067/ 
 
  
680 
 
Title Theory and Applications of 
Spectroscopic Techniques  
Number CYL6XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for   Type Compulsory 
 
Objectives 
 
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce to theoretical background of spectroscopic methods along with their 
instrumentation and application.  
2. Enable students to use such methods whenever needed by giving hands on experience 
with available instruments in the institute. 
 
 Learning Outcomes 
 
The students are expected to: 
1. Apply spectroscopic methods as analytical tool in chemistry, biology, material science, 
medicine. 
2. Operate various spectrometers available in the institute. 
 
Contents 
 
CYL6XX1: Electronic Spectroscopy [1-0-0] 
Properties of electromagnetic radiation, interaction of radiation with matter, Stimulated and 
Spontaneous processes, Einstein coefficient, Rabi Oscillation, intensity of spectral line and line 
shape, Fourier Transformation, General understanding of spectroscopic selection rule. UV-vis and 
Fluorescence Spectroscopy: Basic principles, Laws of photochemistry, Jablonski diagram, Frank -
Condon principle, quantum yield expression and Stern-Volmer equation, FRET. (14 lectures) 
 
CYL6XX2: Infrared and Raman Spectroscopy [1-0-0] 
Basic principle; Organic functional group identification through IR spectroscopy, IR and Raman 
activity. (14 lectures) 
 
CYL6XX3: NMR and EPR Spectroscopy [1-0-0] 
NMR Spectroscopy: Basic principle, Zeeman splitting, chemical shift and spin-spin coupling, 
introduction to AB, AX, AMX spin system, 1D 1H and 13C NMR for structure elucidation, 
Polarization transfer methods and NOE. EPR Spectroscopy: basic principle, Electron-nuclear 
hyperfine interaction, theory of first order EPR spectra, analysis of 1st Order spectra, example of 
EPR spectra of organic radicals and transition metal complexes.  (14 lectures) 
  
Textbooks 
1. Gunther, H., (1995), NMR Spectroscopy, 2nd Edition, Wiley 
2. Banwell, C. N., (1994), Fundamentals of Molecular Spectroscopy, 3rd Edition, Tata 
McGraw-Hill Book Company 
3. Lakowicz, J. R., (2006), Principles of Fluorescence Spectroscopy, 3rd Edition, Springer, 
New York 
  
Reference Books 
1.    Bernath, P. F., (2005), Spectra of Atoms and Molecules, 2nd Edition, Oxford University 
Press 
681 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
2.    Silverstein, R. M. and Webster, F. M., (2010), Spectroscopic Identification of Organic 
Compounds, 6th Edition, Wiley 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Mangal Sundar, K.,  Introduction to Quantum Chemistry and Molecular Spectroscopy, 
http:// http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104106083 
2. Trivedi, V. and Chaudhary, N., Bioanalytical Techniques and Bioinformatics, Department 
of Biotechnology, http:// http://nptel.ac.in/courses/ 102103044. 
3. Das, R., Principles and Applications of Electron Paramagnetic Resonance Spectroscopy, 
Department of Chemical Sciences, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/104106048/2 
682 
 
 
Title Principles of Drug Discovery Number BBL7XX1 
CSL7XX1 
CSL7XX2 
Department Bioscience & Bioengineering and Computer 
Science and engineering 
L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [2] 
Offered for M.Tech Type Elective  
Prerequisite None   
 
Objective 
The Instructor will: 
1. focus on route of drug design and discovery 
Learning Outcome 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. understand the principles of drug design and development 
 Contents 
BBL7XX1: Principles of Drug Discovery [1-0-0] 
(fractal 1) drug targets, pharmacokinetics, administration and dosing, drug testing: in 
vivo and in vitro, drug discovery: natural lead, synthetic lead, combinatorial 
synthesis, pharmacokinetics based drug design, chemical development, process 
development, toxicology, pharmacology, drug metabolism, clinical trials, 
commercialization (14 lectures) 
CSL7XX0: Machine Learning-1 [2-0-0] 
(fractal 2) introduction, gradient descent, support vector machines, decision trees, 
neural networks (14 lectures) 
(fractal 3) nearest neighbour, clustering, dimensionality reduction, generative 
models, feature selection and generation (14 lectures) 
Textbook 
1. Stromgaard,K., Krogsgaard-Larsen,P., Madsen,U., Drug Design and Discovery, 5th 
Edition, CRC Press  
Self-Learning Material  
1. Department of Computer Science, Stanford University 
https://see.stanford.edu/Course/CS229 
 
683 
 
Title Introductory Chemical Biology Number BBL7XX0 
Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech Type Elective  
Prerequisite None   
Objective 
The Instructor will: 
1. build fundamental concept of interdisciplinary science, specially chemical biology 
 
Learning Outcome 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the importance of interdisciplinary sciences and its applications in 
bioengineering fields 
  
Contents 
Introduction: background and definition of chemical biology, overview of chemical biology, 
allied fields and their link with chemical biology, overview of protein structure and 
protein-protein interactions (14 lectures) 
Biomolecular-drug interaction: key discoveries in the field of chemical biology, few 
examples and journey through those discoveries, the use of unusual amino acids to probe 
biomolecular conformation, the use of novel fluorescence probe and applications, sirna as 
therapeutics, small molecule kinase inhibitors, gtp analogues as potential regulators for 
microtubule dynamics (14 lectures) 
Imaging: applications of small molecule as a probe for in vivo imaging, chemical tools for 
perturbation of protein-protein interactions, chemical platforms for protein-protein and 
protein-nucleic acid interactions (14 lectures) 
Textbook 
1. Chemical Biology: From Small Molecules to Systems Biology and Drug Design (Willey), 
Editor(s): Profs. Stuart L. Schreiber, Tarun M. Kapoor and Günther Wess 
Nature Chemical Biology, 2010, 6, 847-853 
Self Learning Material  
None 
 
 
 
684 
 
Title Algorithms in Biology Number BBL7XX0 
Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech Type Elective  
Prerequisite Nil   
Objectives:  
1. To  develop  an  understanding of   the  main  algorithmic  approaches  used  in  solving 
computational problems that arise in the analysis of biomolecular data (such as 
DNA/RNA/amino acid sequences, mass spectra of proteins, whole genomes, or gene 
expression levels). 
Learning outcomes:  
The students are expected to: 
1.  Understand various algorithms related to biological data analysis.  
2.  Develop new efficient algorithm to solve biological data. 
Contents 
Algorithms and Complexity: What is an algorithm?, Biological Algorithm versus Computer 
Algorithms, The change problem, Correct versus Incorrect Algorithms, Recursive 
Algorithms, Iterative versus Recursive Algorithms, Fast vs Slow Algorithms, Big -O 
Notation, Algorithm Design Techniq ues, Tractable versus Intractable Problems (10 
lectures) 
Greedy Algorithms:  Genome Rearrangements, Sorting by Reversals, Approximation 
Algorithms, Breakpoint: A different face of greed, A greedy approach to motif finding (10 
lectures) 
Dynamic programming algorithms: The power of DNA sequence comparison, the change 
problem revisited, the manhattan tourist problem, edit distance and alignments, longest 
common subsequences, global sequence alignment, local sequence alignment, alignment 
and gap penalties, multiple alignment, gene prediction. (10 lectures) 
Clustering and Trees:  Gene expression analysis, Hierarchical Clustering, k-means 
clustering, clustering and corrupted cliques, evolutionary trees, distance based tree 
reconstruction, Evolutionary trees and hie rarchical clustering, small parsimony problem, 
large parsimony problem (7 lectures) 
Gene selection algorithms: SAM, eBayes, Limma, CFS, mRMR, MRMS [5 lectures] 
Textbook 
1. Jones N. C. ,Pevzner   P. A.  (2014), An Introduction to Bioinformatics Algorithms, MIT 
Press 
Reference Books 1. Mitra S. and Acharya T. (2003), Data Mining: Multimedia, Soft 
Computing, and Bioinformatics, New York: John Wiley 
1.  Mitra S., Datta S., Perkins T. and Michailidis G. (2008), Introduction to Machine 
Learning and Bioinformatics, New York: Chapman & Hall/CRC Press. 
 
685 
 
Title Microbes as sensors Number BBL7XX0 
Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 1-0-0 [1] 
Offered for   Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite       
  
Objectives 
1. The instructor will discuss the methods by which living microbes can be used as 
sensors. 
  
Learning Outcomes 
1. Students will have an ability to design live microbial based biosensors for 
sensing specific pollutants, marker for environment and/or health monitoring 
Contents 
Introduction: Advantages of using microbes as sensors, physical and chemical 
methods of microbial, immobilization. (4 lectures) 
Electrochemical microbial biosensor: Amperometric, potentiometric and 
conductimetric (5 lectures) 
Optical biosensors; bioluminescence, fluorescence, and calorimet ric based sensors 
(2 lectures). 
Metabolism based: Microbial sensors based on analysis of oxygen reduction rate or 
carbon di oxide production rate. (3 lectures) 
 Textbook 
No textbook. The research papers will serve as the reading material and reference 
material 
 Reference Books 
1. Brock, et al., (2012), Biology of Microorganisms, 13 th edition Ben,jamin 
Cummings, Boston, MA. 
  
Online course material 
None 
 
 
686 
 
Title Immunodiagnostics and therapeutics Number  BBL7XX0 
Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–2 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. (MT) Program Type Elective 
  
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide an introduction to fundamentals techniques of clinical immunology and Immune 
based Diagnostics 
  
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Immunology based diagnostics techniques for to create and 686nalyse diagnostics 
 Contents 
Immunodiagnostics [14 lectures]: Selection of animals for immunological assays, 
Preparation of antigens, Immunization and methods of bleeding, Serum separation, 
Storage. Antibody titre by ELISA method. Double diffusion, Immuno -electrophoresis 
and Radial Immuno diffusion. Complement fixation test. Hybridoma technology and 
monoclonal antibody production. Lymphoproliferation by mitogen / antigen. 
Immunotherapeutics [14 lectures]: Active and passive immunization; Live, killed, 
attenuated, sub unit vaccines; Vaccine technology - Role and properties of adjuvants, 
recombinant DNA and protein based vaccines, plant -based vaccines, reverse 
vaccinology; Peptide vaccines, conjugate vaccines; Antibody genes and antibody 
engineering- chimeric and hybrid monoclonal antibodies; Catalytic antibodies and 
generation of immunoglobulin gene libraries 
 Laboratory Experiments [12 experiments]: 
Immunoblotting for specific antigens, Dot blot assay, Blood smear identification of leucocytes 
by Giemsa stain. Quantification of Phagocytic activity, Separation of mononuclear cells by 
Ficoll-Hypaque. Immunohistochemistry (direct and indirect peroxidase assay), detection of 
Salmonella genus which causes enteric or Typhoid Fever by using qualitative slide 
agglutination test (Widal test), Detection of Treponemes responsible for veneral diseases such 
as  syphilis (VDRL) test, IgG Purification technique (Protein A Based, Spin Column) 
Textbook 
1.  R.A. Goldsby., Thomas,J.K., and Barbara,A, Osborne., Kuby Immunology, 
Freeman,2002, 6th Edition 
687 
 
2. Stanier, R. Y., General Microbiology, W.H. Freeman and Co., 2009. 
3. Pelczar, M.J., Chan, E. C. S., Krieg, N.R., Microbiology, Tata McGraw – Hill Education, 2001  
Reference Books 
1. Murphy, K., Travers, P., Walport, M., & Janeway, C. (2012). Janeway’s Immunobiology. 
New York: Garland Science. 
2. Madigan, M.T.,  Martinko, J.M.,  Brock, Biology of Microorganisms, Prentice-Hall, Inc., 
2006, 11th  Edition. 
Online Course Material 
1 NPTEL Video Lectures on  Essentials in Immunology by Prof. R. Manjunath, Prof. 
Dipankar Nandi , Prof. Anjali Karande, Indian Institute of Science Bangalore  
(http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104108055/) 
2. NPTEL Video Lectures on Cellular and Molecular Immunology by Prof. Sachin Kumar, 
Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati  (http://nptel.ac.in/courses/102103038/)   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
688 
 
 
Title Flux Balance Analysis Number BBL7XX0 
Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P 
[C] 
3–0–0[3] 
Offered for M.Tech Type Elective  
Prerequisite Nil   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide an introduction to flux balance analysis (FBA), reactions,  metabolites, & pathways, 
mass balanced linear equations, biomass reaction, how to create a stoichiometric matrix from 
reactions and metabolites, gene-protein-reaction associations, constraint-based modeling. 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Implement knowledge of important concepts related to the FBA 
2. To apply them to model the behavior of biological systems as well as develop st rategies for 
manipulating them. 
Contents 
Flux Balance Analysis Overview: Overview, Formulation of Flux Balance Analysis [1 Lecture] 
Reactions, Metabolites, & Pathways:  Identifying Metabolic Reactions and Metabolites (Gene -
Protein-Reactions), Desired Reaction Information, Genome -scale Reconstruction Reactions, 
Desired Metabolite Information, Genome -scale Recon struction Metabolites, Metabolic Pathway, 
System Boundaries:Exchange & Transport Reactions, Genome -scale Metabolic Reconstructions, 
Reconstruction Process: 96 Step Protocol, E.coli Core Model [14 Lectures] 
Mathematical Representation of Reactions & Constra ints: Creating A Stoichiometric Matrix, 
Genome-scale Metabolic Reconstruction [2 Lectures] 
Mass Balanced Linear Equations:  How can we use the Stoichiometric Matrix?, Dynamic Mass 
Balance, The Conceptual Basis of Constraint -based Modeling, Role of Constrain ts, Flux 
Optimization [6 Lectures] 
Biomass Reaction:  Biomass Precursors, E.coli Precursor Metabolites, Maintenance Energy 
Requirements, Biomass Reaction For E.coli Core Model, Biomass Objective Function, Formulation 
of Flux Balance Analysis, E.coli Core Model [8 Lectures] 
Calculating Fluxes:  Cobra Toolbox, Matlab, Drawing Flux Values on a Map, Print Flux Values, 
Examples [8 Lectures] 
Flux Balance Analysis Toolbox:  Methods in Constraint -based Reconstruction and Analysis [3 
Lectures] 
689 
 
 
Textbook 
1.Palsson B. O., (2006), Systems Biology: Properties of Reconstru cted Networks, cambridge 
Press. 
Self Learning Material 
1. Utah State University, https://systemsbiology.usu.edu/syllabus.php 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of  Technology Madras, 
https://nptel.ac.in/noc/individual_course.php?id=noc18-bt22 
  
690 
 
Title Systems Biology in Personalized Genomics Number BBL7XX0 
Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P 
[C] 
3–0–0[3] 
Offered for M.Tech Type Elective  
Prerequisite Nil   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Illustrate “big-data” problems in personalized genomics by discussing recent publications 
2. Provide training in high dimensional biological data analysis 
3. Familiarize the participants with the use of statistical  tools and principles for an alyzing 
genomic/epigenomic data 
Learning Outcomes 
It will enable participants to utilize the methods presented in this course for analyzing biological 
data. The course introduces the current research challenges faced in the fiel d of computational 
systems biology. 
Contents 
Course Overview and Introduction:  Design Principles of Complex Systems, Introduction to 
Genomics and Systems Biology [2 lectures] 
Topological and Network Evolution Models:  Small-World and Scale -Free Networks, Duplication -
Divergence, Complex Models of Network Evolution, Network Properties of Biological Networks [6 
lectures] 
Types of Biological Networks:  Types of Biological Networks, Genes2Networks and Network 
Visualization, Sets2Networks - Creating Functional Association Networks, Genes2FANs - Analyzing 
Gene Lists with Functional Association Networks [4 lectures] 
Data Processing and Identifying Differentially Expressed Genes:  Data Normalization, Univariate 
and multivariate me thods for identifying differentially expressed gene sets  - Part 1, Univariate 
methods (SAM, Welch‟s t -test, LIMMA,) - Part 2, Multivariate method (Principal Component 
Analysis; Gene Set Enrichment Analysis; Supervised and unsupervised machine learning for  data 
classification, including Clustering, SVM and KNN) [15 lectures] 
Analytical Tools for Genomics:  Enrichment Analysis and Enrichr, GEO2Enrichr: A Google Chrome 
Extension for Gene Set Extraction and Enrichment, Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) - 
Preliminaries, Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA), Principal Angle Enrichment Analysis (PAEA), 
Network2Canvas (N2C) and Enrichment Analysis with N2C, Expression2Kinases: Inferring 
Pathways from Differentially Expressed Genes, DrugPairSeeker and the New CMAP, Classifying 
Patients/Tumors from TCGA [15lectures] 
 
691 
 
Textbook 
1.    Ma'ayan A. and MacArthur B. D. (eds.) (2012), New Frontiers of Network Analysis in Systems 
Biology, Springer. 
Reference Books 
Research literature 
Self learning materials 
1. Mount Sinai Center for Bioinformatics, https://www.coursera.org/learn/network-biology 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
692 
 
Title Artificial Intelligence in Bioengineering 
Lab 
Number BBP7XX0 
Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 0-0-2 [1] 
Offered for  Type Open 
Elective  
Prerequisite Machine Learning-1   
Objective: 
The instructor will: 
1. prepare industry relevant advanced cross -disciplinary skills in machine learning 
applications in bioengineering. 
Learning Outcome 
The students will have an ability to: 
4. comprehend fundamental concepts and hands -on techniques of the state -of-the-
art data science and deep learning methodologies 
5. apply popular unsupervised learning methods, including clustering methodologies 
and supervised methods such as deep neural networks 
6. master techniques in modern data analysis to leverage big datasets from omics, 
image and sensors; use pyspark skillfully to analyze big data 
 Laboratory Experiments 
Introduction: data types, big data processing using pyspark (3 labs) 
Machine learning applications : supervised and unsupervised techniques for omics 
data integration and analysis (4 labs) 
Deep learning: applications in omics, image and sensor data (7 labs) 
Textbook 
1. Shalev-Shwartz,S., Ben-David,S., (2014), Understanding Machine Learning: From 
Theory to Algorithms, Cambridge University Press 
2. Tseng,G., Ghosh,D., Zhou X.J., (2015), Integrating Omics Data,  Cambridge 
University Press 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Department of Computer Science, Stanford University 
https://see.stanford.edu/Course/CS229 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. https://www.tutorialspoint.com/pyspark/ 
 
693 
 
Course Title Advances in Food Safety and Technology Course No. CYP6XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Sc. (CY) Program Type Compulsory  
Pre-requisite   
 
Objectives 
 
The instructor will: 
1. Provide in-depth exposure of raw materials composition, consumer foods and fodder. 
2. prepare the students to analyze and improve the quality of foods. 
3.  give knowledge on bio-active compounds, chemical and biochemical reactions, health 
effects and properties of food.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will be able to: 
1. Understand properties and reactions of carbohydrates, lipids and proteins during 
storage and processing of food and how these influence the quality and properties of 
the food. 
2. Have knowledge on and be able to use food regulations.  
3.  
Course Content 
Introduction: general aspects of food industry, world food demand and Indian scenario, 
constituents of food, quality and nutritive aspects. Food additives, standards, deteriorative 
factors and their control, preliminary processing methods, conversion and preservation 
operation. (6 lectures) 
 
Energy Engineering in Food Processing - Generation of Steam, Fuel and Electric Power 
Utilization, Process Controls in Food Processing, Systems for Heating and Cooling Food 
Products. Thermal Properties of Foods, Modes of Heat Transfer - Freezing Systems, Frozen-
Food Properties, Freezing Time refrigeration system for food products. (6 lectures) 
 
Processing Systems: Microbial Survivor Curves, Influence of External Agents, Thermal 
Death Time, Spoilage Probability. Preservation by heat and cold dehydration, 
concentration, frying, irradiation, microwave heating, sterilization and pasteurization, 
fermentation and pickling, packing methods. (10 lectures) 
 
Separation processes in food processing- Electrodialysis Systems, Reverse Osmosis 
Membrane Systems, Membrane Performance, Ultrafiltration Membrane Systems, 
Concentration Polarization. Types of Reverse-Osmosis and Ultrafiltration Systems, Drying 
Processes, Dehydration Systems, Dehydration System Design, Sedimentation, 
Centrifugation, Mixing. (6 lectures) 
 
Production and utilization of food products - soft and alcoholic beverages, dairy products, 
meat, poultry and fish products, treatment and disposal of food processing wastes. (6 
lectures) 
 
Packaging-Introduction, Food Protection, Product Containment, Product Communication, 
Product Convenience, Mass Transfer in Packaging Materials. Innovations in Food Packaging, 
Food Packaging and Product Shelf-life, Food canning technology, fundamentals of food 
canning technology. Heat sterilization of canned food, containers - metal, glass and flexible 
packaging, Canning procedures for fruits, vegetables, meats, and poultry marine products. 
(6 lectures) 
 
 
694 
 
Textbooks: Fundamentals of Food Engineering by Stanley Charm. 
1. Introduction to Food Engineering - R. Paul Singh, Dennis R. 
2. Food microbiology: fundamentals and frontiers. 2nd ed. Washington (DC): 
American Society for Microbiology 
 
Reference Book:  
1. S. Damodaran, K.L. Parkin, and O. R. Fennema, Fennema‟s Food Chemistry, 
fourth edition, 2007, CRC Press 
2. Heldman, D.R., Food Process Engineering, The AVI Publishing Co; Westport, 1975 
 
Online Course Material 
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103107088/ 
2. https://swayam.gov.in/nd2_cec19_ag04/preview 
 
 
 