Source: http://intra.iitj.ac.in/acad_website/intra/PG_Curriculum_document-2020-10-29-12-29-pm.pdf
================================================================================

1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
M.Tech & M.Tech-PhD  
Program Course Curriculum 
 
Department of Chemical Engineering 
IIT Jodhpur 
 
  

2  
Program’s Structure 
Overall Structure (M. Tech. Degree Requirements for Chemical Engineering)  
 
 
Summary of Course Categories and credit distribution for M.Tech. (Chemical 
Engineering) 
 
S.N. Course Type Credits 
1 M.Tech. Compulsory (MC) 17 
2 M.Tech. Electives (ME) 17 
3 M.Tech. Open (MO) 6 
4 M.Tech. Project (MP) 16 
Total Graded 56 
5 Non-Graded (NG) 4 
Total 60 
 
Course Structure: Semester wise distribution of credits  
 
Cat 
. 
Course Title L-T-P Cre 
dits 
 Cat 
. 
Course Title L-T-P Cre 
dits 
I Semester  II Semester 
MC Advanced Transport 
Phenomena 
3-0-0 3  MC Advanced Process 
Control and AI 
Applications 
3-0-0 3 
MC Advanced Reaction 
Engineering 
2-0-2 3  MC Multi-component 
Separation Processes 
2-0-2 3 
MC Advanced Chemical 
Engineering 
Thermodynamics 
2-0-0 2  ME Program Elective 3-0-2 4 
MC Advanced  Mathematical 
Methods in  Chemical 
Engineering 
3-0-0 3  ME Program Elective 3-0-2 4 
ME Program Elective 3-0-0 3  NG Professional Ethics 1-0-0 1 
NG Technical Communication 1-0-0 1      
Total (Graded+Non-graded) 15  Total (Graded+Non-graded) 15 
III Semester  IV Semester 
MP Project 0-0- 
10 
5  MP Project 0-0-22 11 
ME Program Elective 3-0-0 3  MO Open Elective 3-0-0 3 
ME Program Elective 3-0-0 3  NG IP Management and 
Exploitation 
1-0-0 1 
MO Open Elective 3-0-0 3      
NG Systems Engineering and 
Project Management 
1-0-0 1      
Total (Graded+ Non-graded) 15  Total (Graded+Non-graded) 15 
3  
M. Tech. Program: Topic Clouds 
 
Figure: Pictorial representation of M.Tech., M.Tech. -PhD program in chemical 
engineering with specialization 
M.Tech. Compulsory Courses 
 
Advanced 
Transport 
Phenomena 
Advanced 
Reaction 
Engineering 
Advanced 
Chemical 
Engineering 
Thermodyna 
mics 
Advanced 
Mathematical 
Methods in 
Chemical 
Engineering 
Advanced 
Process Control 
and AI 
Applications 
Multi- 
component 
Separation 
Processes 
 Review of 
Fluid 
Kinematics 
 Conservative 
Principles 
and 
Constitutive 
Laws 
 Coupled 
Transport 
Processes 
 Turbulence 
Modelling 
 Multiple 
parameter 
estimation 
 Transport 
Phenomena 
in Large 
Scale and 
Small Scale 
Systems 
 Introduction 
to Adv anced 
Reactors 
 Reaction 
Stability 
Analysis 
 Nonideal 
Reactors 
 Gas-solid 
and Liquid- 
solid 
Catalytic 
Reactions 
 Multiphase 
Reactors, 
Fluidised 
Bed 
Reactors 
 Packed Bed 
Reactors 
 Review of 
Classical 
Thermodyna 
mics 
 Adsorption 
Thermodyna 
mics 
 Chemical 
Reaction 
Thermodyna 
mics 
 Statistical 
Thermodyna 
mics 
 Modelling of 
ideal gases 
and gas 
mixtures 
 Modelling of 
Crystals 
 Introduction 
of vector 
space 
matric. 
 Contraction 
mapping 
 Eigenvalue 
problems 
 Partial 
differential 
equations 
 Special  
ODEs and 
adjoint 
operators 
 Solution  of 
PDEs by 
different 
methods. 
 Introduction 
to advanced 
process 
control; feed- 
forward 
control. 
 Multivariable 
control. 
 AI and IoT in 
control 
systems, 
 AI techniques 
in process 
monitoring, 
fault 
detection and 
diagnosis 
 Real time 
computer 
control  of 
process 
equipment. 
 Concepts 
 Multi- 
component 
Distillation 
 Liquid- 
liquid 
Extraction 
 Separation 
Processes 
involving 
Solid 
Phase 
 Crystallizat 
ion, Drying 
 Case 
Studies 

4  
M.Tech. Electives (ME) 
Program Electives 
 
Group 1: Industry 4.0+Data Analytics 
S. No. Group Courses Title L-T-P Credit 
1 Industry Industrial Design 3-0-0 3 
2 4.0+Data Chemometrics 3-0-0 3 
3 Analytics Data Analytics in Process Modelling and Simulation 2-0-2 3 
4  Computational Fluid Dynamics 3-0-2 4 
5  Process Optimization 3-0-2 4 
6  Process Engineering and AI Applications 2-0-2 3 
7  Packaging of Electronic Devices – Polymeric materials & 3-0-2 4 
  Chemical Technology   
8  Nanocomposite Membrane Technology 3-0-0 3 
9  Artificial Intelligence-1 3-0-0 3 
10  Machine Learning-1 3-0-0 3 
11  Introduction to IoT 1-0-0 1 
12  Nano-sensors 3-0-0 3 
13  Additive Manufacturing 3-0-0 3 
14  Robotics 3-0-2 4 
15  Sensors and IoT Lab 0-0-2 1 
16  Industry 4.0: Applications in Manufacturing Systems 1-0-0 1 
 
Group 2: Reactive Chemical Processing 
S.No. Group Course Title L-T-P Credit 
1 Reactive Molecular Modeling of Catalytic Reactions 3-0-0 3 
2 Chemical Heterogeneous Catalysis and Catalytic Reactors 3-0-0 3 
3 Processing Characterization of Multiphase Reactors 3-0-0 3 
4  Advanced Wastewater Treatment 3-0-2 4 
5  Chemical Reactor Analysis 3-0-2 4 
6  Selected Topics in Reactive Chemical Processing 3-0-0 3 
7  Recent Advances in Reactive Chemical Processing 2-0-0 2 
8  Current Topics in Reactive Chemical Processing 1-0-0 1 
 
Group 3: Petroleum and Petrochemicals 
S. No. Group Course Title L-T-P Credit 
1 Petroleum and Petroleum Refinery Engineering 3-0-2 4 
2 Petrochemicals Petrochemical Technology 3-0-0 3 
3  Petroleum Production Engineering 3-0-0 3 
4  Petroleum Reservoir Engineering 3-0-0 3 
5  Process Safety and Hazards 3-0-0 3 
6  Environmental Impact Assessment 3-0-0 3 
7  Hydrogen and Methanol Economy 3-0-0 3 
8  Selected Topics in Petroleum and Petrochemicals 3-0-0 3 
9  Recent Advances in Petroleum and Petrochemicals 2-0-0 2 
10  Current Topics in Petroleum and Petrochemicals 1-0-0 1 
 
 
 
 
 
5  
 
Group 4: Additional program Electives 
S. No. Group Courses L-T-P Credit 
1 Additional Advanced Fluid Dynamics 3-0-0 3 
2 Electives Advanced Mass Transfer 3-0-0 3 
3  Advanced Heat Transfer 3-0-0 3 
4  Capillarity and wetting 3-0-0 3 
6  Kinetics & Theory for Polymers 3-0-0 3 
7  Catalytic Nanomaterials 3-0-0 3 
8  Mechanics of Viscoelastic Materials 3-0-0 3 
9 
 
 Structure & Property for Polymers 3-0-0 3 
6  
Detailed course contents   
 Program core 
 
Title Advanced Transport Phenomena Number CHL7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 3-0-0 (3) 
Offered for M.Tech., M.Tech-Ph.D. Dual Degree in Chemical 
Engineering 
Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite None   
Objective 
The instructor will: 
1. Provide in-depth understanding of processes involving mass, energy, and momentum 
transport. 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the fundamental aspects of transport phenomena at advanced level. 
2. Develop an understanding and pursue graduate research in this area. 
 
Contents 
Introduction: Review of fluid kinematics, Control Volumes, Reynolds transport. (4 lectures) 
Conservation Principles and constitutive laws: Mass, Momentum, Energy, Entropy; Phase 
interface conditions, Solutions methods for equations of change, steady and unsteady fluid 
flow, Creeping flow, Lubrication approximation, Boundary layer theorem. (12 lectures) 
Coupled transport processes: Steady and Unsteady states phenomena, Forced convection 
heat and mass transport in confined/unconfined laminar flows, low Peclet and high Peclet 
approximations, buoyancy driven flows, Multi-component energy and mass Transport. (12 
lectures) 
Turbulence modelling: Characteristics of turbulent flows, length and time scales, energy 
cascade, Reynolds averaged transport equations, Phenomenological models, Kolmogorov 
hypotheses, universality and turbulence spectra. (10 lectures) 
Transport phenomena in large-scale and small-scale systems: chemical reactors, micro-fluidic 
devices. (4 lectures) 
Text Books 
1. Deen W. M., 1998, Analysis of Transport Phenomena, Oxford University Press, New 
York. 
2. Bird. R. B., Stewart, W. E. and Lightfoot, E. N., 2006, Transport Phenomena, 2nd 
edition, John Wiley & Sons. 
Reference Books 
1. Slattery J.C., 1999, Advanced Transport Phenomena, Cambridge University Press. 
2. Leal L. G., 2010. Advanced Transport Phenomena: Fluid mechanics and convective 
transport processes, Cambrige University Pres. 
3. Pope S. B., 2000, Turbulent Flows, Cambridge University Press. 
4. Belfore, L. A., 2003, Transport Phenomena for Chemical Reactor Design, John Wiley & 
Sons. 
5. Ramachandran, P. A. 2014. "Advanced Transport Phenomena", Cambridge University 
Press. 
Online Course Material 
1. R. Nagarajan, Advanced Transport Phenomena, NPTEL Course Material, Chemical 
Engineering, IIT Madras, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103106068/# 
2. V. Kumaran,  Fundamentals of Transport Processes,  NPTEL Course Material,  
Department  of Chemical Engineering, IIsc Bangalore, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/108/103108099/ 
 
 
  
7  
 
Title Advanced Reaction Engineering Number CHL7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 2-0-2 (3) 
Offered for M.Tech., M.Tech-Ph.D. Dual Degree in Chemical 
Engineering 
Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite None   
Objective 
The Instructor will: 
1. Impart knowledge of hydrodynamics and transport effects in multiphase reactors, 
to learn lower order model for prediction of their performance. 
2. Introduce industrial reactors, 
3. Provide methodology to design multiphase reactors for a few specific applications. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to 
1. In-depth understanding of hydrodynamics and transport effects in multiphase 
reactors. 
2. Design multiphase reactors. 
 
Contents 
Introduction to advanced reactors: Review of reaction kinetics and ideal reactors, 
catalytic reactions, non-catalytic reactions (3 lectures) 
Reaction Stability Analysis: Application of conformal mapping for identification of unique 
steady state and the criteria for the same; estimation of multiple steady states; phase 
diagram and Routh-Hurwitz criteria for stable steady state; linear stability analysis. (5 
lectures) 
Non-ideal reactors: Principles of non-ideal flow, central volume principle and RTD 
theorems, data analysis and interpretation; Models for non-ideal flow patterns, tanks- 
in-series (8 lectures) 
Gas-Solid and Liquid-Solid Catalytic Reactions: Gas-solid reactions, Liquid-solid 
reactions, Non-isothermal reactions, Effectiveness factor; Various regimes of gas- 
absorption and reaction, Enhancement factor. (7 lectures)) 
Different reactors: Multiphase reactors, Fluidised bed reactors; Packed Bed Reactors. (5 
lectures) 
Design Labs (28 hrs) 
1. Stability analysis 
2. Reactor design: Tank in series 
3. Design of mechanically agitated reactors 
4. Bubble column reactor 
5. Slurry bubble column reactor 
6. Fluidised bed reactor 
7. Trickle bed reactor 
8. Non-catalytic heterogeneous reactor 
9. Multi-phase reactor design 
10. Packed bed reactor design 
11. Two phase packed bed reactor 
12. Three phase packed bed reactor 
 
Text Books 
1. Froment, G. F., K. B. Bischoff, 1990, Chemical Reactor Analysis and Design, John 
Wiley. 
2. Doraiswamy, L. K. and D. Uner, 2013, Chemical Reaction Engineering: Beyond the 
Fundamentals, CRC Press. 
Reference Book 
1. Carberry, J. J., Varma, A., 1986, Chemical Reaction and Reactor Engineering, 
Marcell-Dekker 
8  
Online Course Material 
1. Shankar, H.S., Advanced Chemical Reaction Engineering, NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Chemical Engineering, IIT Bombay 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/101/103101001/ 
2. Viswanathan, G.A., Chemical Reaction Engineering II, NPTEL Course 
Department of Chemical Engineering, IIT 
Material, 
Bombay, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/101/103101008/ 
9  
Title Advanced Chemical Engineering 
Thermodynamics 
Number CHL7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 2-0-0 (2) 
Offered for M.Tech., M.Tech-Ph.D. Dual Degree in 
Chemical Engineering 
Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite None   
Objective 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide in -depth knowledge about statistical thermodynamics and applications to 
simple gas systems, lattice structures and structure –property analysis of such 
systems. 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. To apply in-depth knowledge of chemical reaction thermodynamics, 
2. Molecular perspective of equilibrium and states of materials, 
3. Statistical thermodynamics and applications. 
 
Contents 
Prelude to Advanced Thermodynamics : Structure property re lationships of matter, degree 
of freedom, equilibrium, review of classical thermodynamics, reversible and irreversible 
processes; Adsorption Thermodynamics; Chemical Reaction Thermodynamics. (9 
lectures) 
 
Statistical Thermodynamics: probability postulate, Ergodic hypothesis, Probability analysis 
and relating statistical properties to macroscopic properties. Microcanonical, Canonical 
and Grand Canonical Ensembles, Molecular interactions and force fields (8 lectures) 
 
Modelling of ideal gases (monatomic, diatomic, polyatomic):, degrees of freedom and 
internal energy, specific heat capacity, entropy and free energy. Modelling of lattice 
gas. 
Modelling of gas mixtures. (6 lectures) 
 
Modelling of crystals: Perfect crystals, defects. Internal energy and heat capacity, Modelling 
of Adsorption, perturbation analysis. (5 lectures) 
 
Text Book 
1. Smith & Van Ness: Introduction to Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics, McGraw 
Hill, any edition from 4th – 7th. 
Reference Books 
1. Richard Elliot, Intro ductory Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics, Pearson 
Education, 2nd Edition, 2014 
2. Terrel L Hill, Introduction to Statistical Thermodynamics, 1st Edition, Dover 
Publications,1988 
Online Course Material 
1. Kishore, N., Advanced Thermodynamics, NPTEL Course Material, Department of  
Chemical Engineering, IIT Guwahati 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/103/103103162/ 
10  
Title Advanced Mathematical Methods in Chemical  
Engineering 
Number CLL7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 3-0-0 
Offered for M.Tech. and M.Tech.-Ph.D. Dual Degree Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Knowledge of Engineering Mathematics   
Objective 
To impart knowledge about advanced mathematical techniques in chemical engineering particularly 
analytical maths. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
A successfully completed course should enable the stud ent to have fair knowledge of advanced 
mathematical methods in chemical engineering particularly analytical maths including eigenvalue 
problems and partial differential equations. 
 
Contents 
Introduction of vector space metric, norm, inner product space exam ples, onto, into, one to one 
function, completeness of space. (8 lectures) 
Vectors: Linear combination of vectors, dependent/independent vectors, orthogonal and orthonormal 
vectors, gram -schmidt orthogonalization. Contraction Mapping : Definition; applicati ons in chemical 
engineering; examples. Matrix, determinants and properties. (8 lectures) 
Eigenvalue problem: Various theorems; solution of a set of algebraic equations; solution of a set of 
ordinary differential equations; solution of a set of nonhomogeneo us first order ordinary differential 
equations (ivps), applications of eigenvalue problems: stability analysis; bifurcation theory; examples. 
(7 lectures) 
Partial Differential Equations : Classification of equations; Boundary conditions; Principle of Linear  
superposition, Special ODEs and Adjoint operators: Properties of adjoint operator; sturm luiville theorem 
for eigenvalues and eigenfunctions. (5 lectures) 
Solution of linear, homogeneous PDEs by separation of variables: Cartesian coordinate system & 
different classes of PDEs; cylindrical coordinate system; spherical coordinate system (8 lectures) 
Solution of PDEs by different methods. (6 lectures) 
 
Text Books 
Pushpvanam S., Mathematical Methods in Chemical Engineering, Prentice Hall India Rice and Do, 
Applied Mathematics and Modeling for Chemical Engineers, John Wiley and Sons, Inc 
Mickley, Sherwood and Reed, Applied Mathematics in Chemical Engineering, Tata McGraw-Hill 
 
Reference Books 
Verma, A. and Morbidelli, M., Mathematical Methods in Chemical Engineering Loney, N.W. 
Applied Mathematical Methods for Chemical Engineers, CRC Press Online Course Material 
Advanced Mathematical Techniques in Chemical Engineering, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/105/103105106/ 
11  
Title Advanced Process Control and AI 
Applications 
Number CHL7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 3-0-0 (3) 
Offered for M.Tech., M.Tech-Ph.D. Dual Degree Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Introductory course on process control   
Objective 
The Instructor will provide knowledge about the advanced concepts in process control, 
enabling multi- variable control, system identification, AI techniques in process control and 
digital control with computer-aided case studies. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Have fair knowledge and understanding of the advanced concepts in process control 
and AI techniques in process control. 
 
Contents 
Review of classical feedback control & transfer function approaches, State-space models, 
Distributed parameter models (5 lectures) 
Introduction to advanced process control; feed-forward control, ratio control, dead time 
compensation (4 lectures) 
 
Multivariable control & relative gain array (4 lectures) 
Internal model control (3 lectures) 
Z-transforms & introduction to digital control (4 lectures) 
State estimation & system identification (5 lectures) 
 
Adaptive control, nonlinear control, intelligent control (4 lectures) 
Model predictive control (3 lectures) 
 
AI and IoT in control systems, Fuzzy controllers, neural network for controllers, AI techniques 
in process monitoring, fault detection and diagnosis (5 Lectures) 
 
Real time computer control of process equipment, case studies & use of MATLAB control 
system toolbox & SIMULINK (5 lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. Coughanowr D. R. and LeBlanc S., 2008, Process System Analysis and Control, 3rd 
Ed., McGraw Hill. 
2. Ogunnaike B. A. and Ray W. H., 1994, Process Dynamics Modeling and Control, Oxford 
University Press. 
3. T.E. Quantrille and Y.A. Liu, 1991, Artificial Intelligence in Chemical Engineering, 
Academic Press 
Reference Books 
1. Stephanopoulos G., 1990, Chemical Process Control – An Introduction to Theory and 
Practice, Prentice-Hall of India. 
2. Seborg D. E., Edgar T. F. and Mellichamp D. A., 2004, Process Dynamics and Control, 
2nd Ed., John Wiley and Sons. 
3. Bequette B. W., 2003, Process Control – Modeling, Design and Simulation, Prentice- 
Hall of India. 
Online Course Material 
1. Patwardhan, S.C., Advanced Process Control, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Chemical Engineering, IIT Bombay, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/101/103101003/ 
12  
Title Multi-component Separation Processes Number CHL7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 2-0-2 (3) 
Offered for M.Tech., M.Tech-Ph.D. Dual Degree Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite None   
Objective 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide in-depth knowledge about the multi-component separation processes that are 
relevant to industries today. 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to gain: 
1. The understanding of multicomponent separation processes with relevant industry 
examples and case studies. 
2. The detailed knowledge about liquid-liquid extraction, multi-component distillation, 
crystallization and drying processes 
Contents 
Concepts & Definitions: Basic separation techniques, Maxwell -Stefan equations and their 
applications, estimation of diffusion coefficients, interphase multicomponent mass 
transfer, industrial chemical processes, separation factor, ma ss transfer in laminar and 
turbulent flow, models for mass transfer, degrees of freedom, azeotropic systems, 
multiphase systems, cascade and hybrid systems (11 lectures) 
 
Multi-component Distillation and Liquid -Liquid Extraction: McCabe–Thiele Graphical Method 
for tray towers and its extension, stage efficiencies, equipment for solvent extraction, 
Hunter–Nash graphical equilibrium -stage method, Theory and scale -up of extractor 
performance, Fenske –Underwood–Gilliland (FUG) method, Equation -Tearing Procedure s, 
Newton–Raphson (NR) method, Inside-Out method, batch distillation (11 lectures) 
 
Separation involving Solid phase: Crystallization, solid drying (6 lectures) 
 
Design Labs (28 hours) 
Design of a multi-component distillation column 
Design of a liquid-liquid extraction unit 
Design and development of a spray dryer 
Spray drying of milk to get milk powder 
Flash vaporization 
Recovery of a protease inhibitor from an organic solvent via crystallization 
Crystallization of p-xylene from a mixture with m-xylene  
Separation by reverse osmosis 
Micro-filtration 
Separation of whey from cheese via ultrafiltration 
Recovery of caustic from Hemicellulose via dialysis 
Demineralization of water by ion-exchange 
 
Text Book 
1. Seader, Henley and Ropar (2011) Separation Process Principles, 3rd Edition Wiley. 
2. Ross Taylor, R. Krishna, (1993) Multicomponent Mass Transfer, John Wiley & 
Sons. 
Reference Books 
1. Humphrey, J. L. and Keller, G. E., 1997, Separation Process Technology, McGraw- Hill, 
NY 
2. Kister, H. Z., 1992, Distillation Design, McGraw-Hill. 
13  
Details of Elective Courses 
Program Electives 
Group 1: Industry 4.0+Data Analytics 
Title Industrial Design Number CHL7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 3-0-0 (3) 
Offered for M.Tech., M.Tech-Ph.D. Dual Degree Type Programme 
Elective 
Prerequisite Knowledge of Unit Operations, Fluid 
Mechanics 
  
Objective 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide knowledge of design and engineering problems of piping in process industries. 
2. Provide knowledge of Industry4.0 in chemical companies. 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Have fair knowledge and understanding of the design and engineering problems of 
piping in process industries. 
2. Contribute to Industry 4.0 related work in chemical companies. 
Contents 
Transport of Solids: slurry transport systems, Correlations for various flow regimes. 
Conveying systems, solid gas flow pattern in different inclined pipe lines, Concept of saltation 
and choking velocities, pressure drop calculations, Design of pneumatic systems. (12 lectures) 
Flow of Fluids: Frictional loss, resistance of fittings, valves and bends, carrying capacity 
of pipes and piping networks; Pressure drop and diameter calculations of pipe carrying steam, 
water, oil and gases; Optimum pipe diameter and network design. (9 lectures) 
 
Pipes and Fittings: Standards, codes and practices; Wall thickness, tolerances, design of 
flanges and fittings, Flow regimes and piping design for two-phase flow; design of piping 
for reboiler and condenser systems. (6 lectures) 
Strength and Failure of Materials: Stable and unstable deformation, plasticity, plastic 
instability, design assumptions, stress evaluation and design limits, codes and standards; 
Local components of pipe bends, branch connections and bolted flange connections. (8 
lectures) 
 
Simplified Methods for Flexibility Analysis: Thermal expansion loops, approximate solutions 
and flexibility analysis by model tests; Expansion joints and approaches for reducing 
expansion effects. (4 lectures) 
 
Industry 4.0 in chemical companies: Digitalisation to improve its operational efficiency, 
Recycling, Sustainability aspects, AI in processing to automate knowledge. (3 lectures) 
 
Text Book 
1. Smith P., 2007, Fundamentals of Piping Design: Drafting and Design Methods for 
Process Applications, Gulf Publishing. 
2. Quantrille T.E. and Liu Y.A., 1991, Artificial Intelligence in Chemical Engineering, 
Aademic Press. 
Reference Books 
1. Marcus R.D., 1990, Leung L.S., Klinzing G. E. and Rizk F., Pneumatic Conveying of 
Solids, Chapman and Hall 
2. Nayyar M.L., 2000, Piping Handbook, 7th Ed., McGraw Hill 
3. Boterman R. and Smith P., 2008, Advanced Piping Design, Gulf Publishing. 
4. Deutsch D.J., 1980, Process Piping Systems, McGraw Hill 
Online Course Material 
1. Moholkar V.S., Process Design Decisions and Project Economics, NPTEL course 
material, Department of Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology 
Guwahati, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103103039/ 
14  
Title Chemometrics Number CHL7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering, L-T-P (C) 3-0-0 (3) 
Offered for M.Tech., M.Tech.-Ph.D. Type Programme Elective 
Prerequisite basics of chemical engineering   
Objective 
The instructor will: 
1. Impart knowledge of modern methods of analyzing chemical data. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the: 
1. Comprehensive knowledge of the modern methods of reducing and analyzing chemical 
data. 
 
Contents 
Prelude to chemometrics: Introduction and history of Chemometrics, factorial analysis; 
reverse, surface and mixture design; correlograms and time series analysis; sequential 
methods, Pattern recognition. [6 lectures] 
 
Calibration: introduction to multivariable calibration, selectivity problems, statistical problems 
in calibration, Univariate calibration, multiple linear and principal components regression, 
model validation, outlier detection. [6 lectures] 
 
Evolutionary signals and pro cess analysis in chemical plants: exploratory data analysis and 
processing, determining composition, resolution pre -processing, composition of sequential 
data, screening. [6 lectures] 
 
Derivatives in Spectroscopy: Theoretical and computed derivatives, deri vative approximation, 
calibrating with derivatives, spectroscopic monitoring of reactions, kinetics and multivariable 
model, online spectroscopy. [6 lecture] 
 
General Data Analysis: simple analysis of variance and experimental design (one -way, two- 
way with and without replicates, randomized and blocked designs). [6 lectures] 
 
Computational methods: control structures for selection and iteration, functions, array data 
structure, numerical methods for data analysis. [6 lectures] 
 
Machine leaning in Chemical plants: Introduction, basics of decision trees, combining multiple 
learner, reinforcement learning, experimental design and analysis. [6 lectures] 
 
Text Book 
1. Richard G. Brereton, 2003, Chemometrics: Data Analysis for the Laboratory and 
Chemical Plant, Wiley 
 
Reference Books 
1. Harald Martens, Tormod Næs, 1989, Multivariate Calibration, John Wiley & Sons. 
2. Howard Mark, Jerry Workman, Jr, 2018, Chemometrics in Spectroscopy, Elsevier 
Academic Press. 
3. Richard G. Brereton, 2007, Applied Chemometrics for Scientists, John Wiley & Sons. 
4. Ethem Alpaydin, 2004, Introduction to Machine Learning, MIT Press. 
5. Vandeginste, B.G.M., Massart, D.L., Buydens, L.M.C., Jong, de D., Lewi, P.J., Smeyers- 
Verbeke, J., 1998, Handbook of Chemometrics and Qualimetrics: Part B, Elsevier. 
6. Kreyszig, Erwin, 2014, Advanced Engineering Mathematics, John Wiley and Sons, 10th 
Edition. 
  
15  
Title Data Analytics in Process Modelling and 
Simulation 
Number CHL7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 2-0-2 (3) 
Offered for M.Tech., M.Tech-Ph.D. Dual Degree in 
Chemical Engineering 
Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   
Objective 
The Instructor will: 
1. Impart knowledge about the mathematical modelling of physical systems, data 
analytics and introduce flow -sheet simulation as a tool for process analysis, enabl ing 
systems approach in modelling of a process with interaction among several unit 
processes and unit operations. 
2. Provide insight into development of simulators to do steady -state and dynamic 
simulation. 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Gain in-depth knowledge of the data analytics and mathematical modelling of physical 
systems and process with interaction among several unit operations and have insight 
into development of simulators to do steady-state and dynamic simulation. 
Contents 
Introduction to mathematical modelling: lumped vs distributed parameter systems, process 
synthesis, design, simulation & analysis, Modelling of various chemical systems covering 
heat, mass, momentum transfer, and reactions, Sequential and simultaneous modular 
approaches for flow-sheet Simulation (9 lectures). 
Equation solving approaches: Partitioning, Decomposition, Disjointing, PTM, SWS-, Steward-, 
and Rudd-Algorithms, Direct Methods, Pivoting, Iterative methods, BTF, BBTF, Block Back 
Substitution, BTS. (4 lectures) 
Decomposition of networks: Tearing algorithms, digraph, MCN, signal flow graph, B&M 
algorithm, BTA, K&S algorithm, M&H-1 & -2 algorithms, and related problems, 
Convergence Promotion. (6 lectures) 
Data analysis: Sources and data banks of physical & thermodynamic properties, Modularity & 
Routing, Specific purpose simulation, Dynamic simulation (9 lectures) 
Process Modelling and Simulation Design Lab (28 hrs) 
Modelling of Heat exchange equipment (2) 
Modular approaches for flow-sheet Simulation (4) 
Process simulation using MATLAB (6) 
Process simulation using ASPEN (6) 
Distillation with reflux, reboiler and condenser (6) 
Case studies: Process simulation of industrial scale processes and validation (4) 
 
Text Book 
1. Jana, A.K. Chemical Process Modelling & Co mputer Simulation, 2nd ed., PHI Learning, 
2011 
Reference Books 
1. Babu, B.V. Process Plant Simulation, Oxford University Press, India, 2004. 
2. Luyben, W.L. Process Modelling, Simulation & Control for Chemical Engineers, 2nd ed., 
McGraw Hill, 1990 
Online Course Material 
1. Agrawal, V.K., Process Modelling and Simulation, NPTEL Course Material, Department  
of Chemical Engineering, IIT Roorkee 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/107/103107096/ 
16  
Title Computational Fluid Dynamics Number CHL7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 3-0-2 (4) 
Offered for M.Tech., M.Tech-Ph.D. Dual Degree Type Programme Elective 
Prerequisite Knowledge of Fluid Mechanics   
Objective 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide an understanding of physical models to study hydrodynamics in engineering 
systems. 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Interpret and understand the physical models to study hydrodynamics in engineering 
systems. 
Contents 
Introduction: Review of equations of change for transfer processes, Philosophy of 
computational fluid dynamics (CFD), simplified flow models such as incompressible, 
potential and creeping flow, flow classification. (5 lectures) 
Grid Generation: Structured and unstructured grids, choice of suitable grid, grid 
transformation of equations, some modern developments in grid generation for solving 
engineering problems. (3 lectures) 
Finite Difference Method (FDM): Discretization of ODE and PDE, approximation for first, 
second and mixed derivatives, implementation of boundary conditions, discretization 
errors, FDM applications to engineering problems (12 lectures) 
Finite Volume Method (FVM): Discretization methods, approximations of surface integrals 
and volume integrals, interpolation and differential practices, implementation of boundary 
conditions, FVM application to engineering problems (11 lectures) 
Special Topics and Case Studies: Flow and heat transfer in pipes and channels, square cavity 
flows, reactive flow, multiphase flow, rotary kiln reactors, packed and fluidized bed 
reactors, furnaces and fire systems, Overview of finite element method. (11 lectures) 
CFD Design Lab (28 hrs) 
Design Flow Models for: 
Incompressible flow 
Potential flow 
Creeping flow 
Greed generation technique 
Discretization methods for ODE and PDE 
Application technique of Finite Volume Method 
Surface and volume integrals 
Text Books 
1. Fletcher C.A.J., 1998, Computational Techniques for Fluid Dynamics, Vol. 1: 
Fundamental and General Techniques, Springer-Verlag. 
2. Fletcher C.A.J., Computational Techniques for Fluid Dynamics, 1998, Vol. 2: Specific 
Techniques for Different Flow Categories, Springer-Verlag. 
Reference Books 
1. Anderson J.D., 1995, Computational Fluid Dynamics, McGraw Hill. 
2. Ghoshdastidar P.S., 1998, Computer Simulation of Flow and Heat Transfer, Tata 
McGraw Hill. 
3. Ferziger J.H. and Peric M., 2002, Computational Methods for Fluid Dynamics, 3rd Ed., 
Springer 
4. Patankar S.V., 2004, Numerical Heat Transfer and Fluid Flow, Taylor and Francis. 
Online Course Material 
1. Jayanti, S., Computational Fluid Dynamics, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Chemical Engineering, IIT Madras, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/106/103106119/ 
17  
Title Process Optimisation Number CHL7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 3-0-2 (4) 
Offered for M.Tech., M.Tech-Ph.D. Dual Degree Type Programme Elective 
Prerequisite knowledge of Chemical Engineering 
processes and Mathematics 
  
Objective 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide in-depth knowledge of various techniques of optimization and their application 
to chemical processes. 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Have fair knowledge of various techniques of optimization and their application to 
chemical processes. 
 
Contents 
Introduction: Optimization and calculus based classical optimization Techniques (4 lectures) 
One Dimensional Minimization Methods: Elimination methods- equally spaced points 
method, Fibonacci method and golden section method; Interpolation methods- quadratic 
interpolation and cubic interpolation, Newton and quasi-Newton methods, Linear 
Programming (11 lectures) 
 
Multivariable Non-Linear Programming: Unconstrained- Different methods for non-linear 
programming; Constrained- complex method, feasible directions method, GRG method, 
penalty function methods and augmented Lagrange multiplier method. (10 lectures) 
Dynamic Programming: Multistage processes- acyclic and cyclic, sub-optimization, 
principle of optimality and applications. (6 lectures) 
 
Geometric Programming (GP): Differential calculus and Arithmetic-Geometric inequality 
approach to unconstrained GP; Constrained GP minimization; GP with mixed inequality 
constraints and Complementary GP, Emerging Optimization Techniques: Genetic 
algorithm, simulated annealing, particle swarm and ant colony optimization. (11 lectures) 
 
Process Optimisation Design Lab (28 hrs) 
Solution of 1-D problems (4) 
Linear programming problem (4) 
Multi-variable nonlinear programming problem (4) 
Dynamic programming problem (4) 
Geometric programming problem (4) 
Solution of case-studies problems (8) 
 
Text Book 
1. Edgar T.F., Himmelblau D.M. and Lasdon L.S., 2001,Optimization of Chemical 
Processes, 2nd Ed., McGraw Hill. 
Reference Books 
1. Beveridge G.S.G. and Schechter R.S., 1970, Optimization: Theory and Practice, 
McGraw Hill. 
2. Rao S.S.,2009, Engineering Optimization Theory and Practice, 4th Ed., Wiley. 
Online Course Material 
1. Sarkar, D., Optimization in Chemical Engineering, NPTEL Course Material, Chemical 
Engineering, IIT Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/105/103105139/ 
18  
Title Process Engineering and AI Applications Number CHL7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 2-0-2 (3) 
Offered for M.Tech., M.Tech.-Ph.D. Dual Degree in Chemical 
Engineering 
Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   
Objective 
The Instructor will: 
1. Impart knowledge on the issues and techniques involved in designing of large-scale 
chemical processes with multiple unit operations. 
2. Impart knowledge about role of AI in process engineering. 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Have the fair understanding and knowledge about the issues and techniques 
involved in designing of large -scale chemical processes with multiple unit operations 
in industries. 
2. Have the fair understanding about the role of AI in process engineering. 
 
Contents 
Introduction: History and Relation of Artificial Intelligence (AI) to Process Engineering; 
Knowledge Representation I- Predicate calculus and Semantic Networks; flow-sheet 
synthesis, concept of economic potential of batch, continuous and recycle reactors, 
expert system shells. (8 lectures) 
Neural Nets and Inexact Reasoning: Introduction and application to process engineering, 
Blackboard Architecture. (4 lectures) 
Reactors and separation systems: Guidelines for selection methods; Heat and energy 
integration 
by calculating demands and targets; distillation column sequencing; grand composite 
curve 
and utility targeting; steam and cooling water circuits; Problem solving using AI and 
process 
modelling tools. (12 lectures) 
Process economics: cost estimation, annuities, tax, depreciation, profitability analysis, risk 
management (4 lectures) 
 
Process Engineering Design Lab (28 hrs): 
Flow sheet analysis (2) 
Economic model and comparison of reactors: Batch and Continuous reactors: Batch and 
Recycle reactors, Continuous and recycle reactors (6) 
Column sequencing and water circuits (6) 
AI application in process equipment/ plant performance analysis (8) 
Case studies on Chemical plant design (6) 
 
Text Books 
1. T.E. Quantrille and Y.A. Liu, 1991, Artificial Intelligence in Chemical Engineering, 
Academic Press. 
2. Douglas J.M., 1988, Conceptual Design of Chemical Processes, NY: McGraw-Hill. 
3. Smith R., 2005, Chemical Process: Design and Integration, 1st ed. West Sussex, 
UK: Wiley. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Seider, W. D., Seader,J.D. and Lewin, D.R., 2003, Product and Process Design 
Principles: Synthesis, Analysis, and Evaluation, 2nd ed. New York, NY: Wiley. 
2. Edgar and Himmelblau, 1988, Optimization of Chemical Processes, New York, NY: 
McGraw Hill 
19  
Title Packaging of Electronic Devices – Polymeric 
materials & Chemical Technology 
Number CHL7XX 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-2 
Offered for MTech, MTech-PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite Basic knowledge of polymeric materials   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Impart knowledge about the current status as well as advancements for electronic 
packaging of devic es along with process details and their relevance to Chemical 
Engineers. Empower scholars to pursue further career and self-learning in this area. 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the knowledge about: 
1. Various types of packages, levels of  packaging and overall processes relevant to 
packaging starting from assembly to reliability. 
2. Detailed know-how about the chemical manufacturing processes relevant to Electronic 
Packaging of devices. 
Contents 
Introduction to Electronic Packaging: Definitions, Need for Electronic Packaging, Levels of 
packaging, Types of packages, Introduction to Device generations, Introduction to device 
manufacturing process, Case studies, DFM, DFR, DFT (5 Lectures) 
Flip Chip Packaging: History and details of process flow f or flip-chip technology, Polymers for 
flip-chip technology (6 Lectures) 
Advanced Packaging: Substrate manufacturing technology, Embedded die technology, core - 
less technology, wafer and panel level packaging, Polymers for Advanced Packaging, 
subtractive process, semi-additive process, additive process (12 Lectures) 
Surface Mount Technology: BGA, LGA, PGA, SMT failures, Lead-free solder (3 Lectures) 
Thermal Management: Need for thermal management, Heat Sinks, Novel thermal  
management technologies, Passives (6 Lectures) 
Electronic Package Reliability: Thermal reliability, Mechanical reliability, Moisture sensitivity 
test, Pre -conditioning, Chemical resistance, Electrical reliability, HAST, B -HAST (10 
Lectures) 
Laboratory Experiments (28) 
Shear-rheology of polymer dielectric for lamination processes1 
Shear-rheology of polymer dielectric for lamination processes2 
Structural analysis for polymer dielectrics for SEM1 
Structural analysis for polymer dielectrics for SEM2 
Structural analysis for polymer dielectrics for reliability via AFM1 
Structural analysis for polymer dielectrics for reliability via AFM2 
SEM analysis of mobile chip 1/SEM analysis of a mobile chip 2/SEM analysis of a mobile chip 3 
SEM analysis of a television chip/ SEM analysis of a Air Conditioner chip 
SEM analysis of an old generation chip (pre 1990s) 
Textbook 
1. Khandpur R. S., (2005), Printed Circuit Boards Design, Fabrication, Assembly and 
Testing, Tata McGraw Hill Education Private Limited India 
Reference Books 
1. Tummala R., (2019), Fundamentals of Device and Systems  Packaging: Technologies 
and Applications, McGraw Hill 
Online Course Material 
1. Bhattacharya A, Electronic Packaging & Manufacturing, NPTEL Course Material, Department 
of Mechanical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112105267/ 
Mahesh G V, An Introduction to Electronics Systems Packaging, NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Electrical Engineering, IISc Bengaluru, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108108031/ 
20  
 
 
 
Title Nanocomposite Membrane Technology Number CHL8XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 3-0-0 (3) 
Offered for M.Tech.-Ph.D. Dual Degree and Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Basic knowledge of Engineering and 
Chemistry 
  
Objective 
The instructor will provide: 
1. Fundamentals, synthesis and characterisation of nanocomposite membrane, 
2. Different applications of nanocomposite membrane technology. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have: 
1. Comprehensive knowledge of fundamentals, synthesis and characterisation of 
nanocomposite membrane technology. 
2. Its applications in different fields such as water treatment, gas separation etc. 
3. Challenges and opportunities. 
 
Contents 
 
Introduction to nanocomposite membrane technology: Membrane types, membrane 
processes, transport theories. (8 Lectures) 
 
Synthesis of nanocomposite membranes: Preparation techniques, homogeneous membranes, 
composite membranes, raw materials, processing methods. (6 Lectures) 
 
Characterisation of nanocomposite membranes: Pore size, micrographic methods, 
spectroscopic methods, strength measurements. (6 Lectures) 
 
Nanocomposite membranes in water treatment: Conventional nanocomposites, thin film 
nanocomposites, TFC with nanocomposite substrate. (7 Lectures) 
 
Nanocomposite membranes in gas separation. (5 Lectures) 
Challenges in processing of nanocomposite membranes. (5 Lectures) 
Environment and safety issues. (5 Lectures) 
Text Book 
1. Tewari, P.K., (2016), Nanocomposite Membrane Technology: Fundamentals and 
Applications, CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Group. 
 
Reference book 
1. Baker, R.W., (2004), Membrane Technology and Applications, 2nd Edition, Membrane 
Technology and Research Inc., Menlo Park, CA. 
Online Course Material 
1. Mohanty, K., Membrane Technology, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Chemical 
Engineering, IIT Guwahati, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/103/103103163/ 
21  
Title Artificial Intelligence-1 Number CSXXXX 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. 1st Year, Ph.D. 1st Year Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Cover various paradigms that come under the broad umbrella of AI, with some of them 
being covered in depth 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Develop an understanding of where and how AI can be used 
 
Contents 
Introduction (1 lecture) 
Propositional logic (8 lectures) 
Search: Uninformed strategies (BFS, DFS, Dijkstra), Informed strategies (A* search, heuristic 
functions, hill-climbing), Adversarial search (Minimax algorithm, Alpha-beta pruning) (10 
lectures) 
Predicate logic: Knowledge representation, Resolution (6 lectures) 
Rule-based systems: Natural language parsing, Context free grammar (3 lectures) 
Constraint satisfaction problems (4 lectures) 
Planning: State space search, Planning Graphs, Partial order planning (4 lectures) 
Uncertain Reasoning: Probabilistic reasoning, Bayesian Networks, Dempster-Shafer theory, 
Fuzzy logic (6 lectures) 
 
Textbook 
1. Russel,S., and Norvig,P., (2015), Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, 3rd Edition, 
Prentice Hall 
 
Reference Books 
1. Research literature 
 
Self-Learning Material 
1. Department of Computer Science, University of California, Berkeley, 
http://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLD52D2B739E4D1C5F 
2. NPTEL: Artificial Intelligence, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106105077/ 
22  
  Title Machine Learning-1 Number CSXXXX 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [c] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. 1st Year, Ph.D. 1st Year Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite None   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide motivation and understanding of the need and importance of Machine Learning in 
today’s world 
2. Provide details about various algorithms in Machine Learning 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Develop a sense of Machine Learning in the modern context, and independently work on 
problems relating to Machine Learning 
2. Design and program efficient algorithms related to Machine Learning, train models, 
conduct experiments, and deliver ML-based applications 
 
Contents 
(fractal 1) Introduction: Motivation, Different types of learning, Linear regression, Logistic 
regression (2 lectures) 
Gradient  Descent: Introduction, Stochastic Gradient Descent, Subgradients, Stochastic 
Gradient Descent for risk minimization (2 lectures) 
Support Vector Machines: Hard SVM, Soft SVM, Optimality conditions, Duality, Kernel trick, 
Implementing Soft SVM with Kernels (4 lectures) 
Decision Trees: Decision Tree algorithms, Random forests (2 lectures) 
Nearest Neighbour: k-nearest neighbour, Curse of dimensionality (1 lecture) 
Neural Networks: Feedforward neural networks, Expressive power of neural networks, SGD and 
Backpropagation (3 lectures) 
(fractal 2) Clustering: Linkage-based clustering algorithms, k-means algorithm, Spectral 
clustering (2 lectures) 
Dimensionality reduction: Principal Component Analysis, Random projections, Compressed 
sensing (2 lectures) 
Generative Models: Maximum likelihood estimator, Naive Bayes, Linear Discriminant Analysis, 
Latent variables and Expectation-maximization algorithm, Bayesian learning (4 lectures) 
Feature Selection and Generation: Feature selection, Feature transformations, Feature learning 
(3 lectures) 
Model selection and validation: Validation for model selection, k-fold cross-validation, Training- 
Validation-Testing split, Regularized loss minimization (3 lectures) 
(fractal 3) Statistical Learning Framework: PAC learning, Agnostic PAC learning, Bias - 
complexity tradeoff, No free lunch theorem, VC dimension, Structural risk minimization, 
Adaboost (7 lectures) 
Foundations of Deep Learning: DNN, CNN, RNN, Autoencoders (7 lectures) 
Textbook 
1. Shalev-Shwartz,S., Ben-David,S., (2014), Understanding Machine Learning: From Theory to 
Algorithms, Cambridge University Press 
Reference Books 
1. Mitchell Tom (1997). Machine Learning, Tata McGraw-Hill 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, 
https://see.stanford.edu/Course/CS229 
 
  
23  
Title Introduction to Internet of Things (IoT) Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 
Offered for M. Tech. 1st year Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide overview of applications of IoT and relevant technologies 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Identify and integrate different components required for IoT applications 
 
Contents 
 
Introduction to IoT: Sensing, Actuation, Basics of IoT Networking (2 Lectures) 
IoT Architecture, Communication Protocols for IoT (2 Lectures) 
Sensor Networks: Wireless Sensor Network, Sensor nodes (2 Lectures) 
Machine to machine Communication: Introduction, Node types and M2M Applications, 
Integration of Sensors and Actuators for Implementation of IoT (4 Lectures) 
Introduction to Cloud, Fog, and Edge Computing, Smart cities and Smart homes, Industrial IoT 
(4 Lectures) 
 
Textbook 
1. Kamal, R., (2017), Internet of Things - Architecture and Design Principles, 1st Edition, 
Mcgraw Hill. 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. Misra, S., Introduction to Internet of Things , NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Computer Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106105166/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
24  
Title Nanosensors Number MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech, M. Tech and PhD Type Open Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide understanding about importance of nanoscale materials for sensing applications. 
2. Teach approaches for fabrication and characterizing of sensors based on nanomaterials. 
3. Enhance critical, creative and innovative thinking to tailor nanomaterials for specific application. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Design and fabricate nanomaterial based sensors. 
2. Undertake interdisciplinary research and exploit nanomaterials for new sensing applications. 
 
Contents 
Sensor types: Displacement, position and proximity sensors (3 lectures); vel ocity, motion, force 
and pressure sensors (4 lectures); components and classification of sensors (1 lecture); 
parameters for sensor characterization (1 lecture); sensor arrays (1 lecture). 
Nanostructures and Nanoparticles: Nanostructures (1 lectures); nano structure fabrication (top 
down and bottom up approach) (3 lectures); characterization of  nanostructures using different 
techniques (Atomic Force Microscopy, Scanning Electron Microscopy, Tunneling Electron 
Microscopy) (3 lectures); nanoparticles (types an d shapes) (1 lecture); nanoparticle 
production, shape control, functionalization and application (2 lectures); nanowires (properties, 
sensing mechanism, fabrication, and devices) (4 lectures); quantum dots (1 lecture). 
Carbon nanotubes/nanofibres (CNT/CNF)  and other Nanosensors: CNT structure, properties, 
synthesis, functionalization (3 lectures); CNT/CNF based sensors (single layer/multi -layer) (2 
lectures); nanostructure, nanoparticles, nanowire and nanofibre based metal oxide sensors (3 
lectures); flexib le sensors and electronic skin (2 lectures); Nanosensors in engineering 
applications: optical, chemical, mechanical, electrochemical, mass sensitive, biosensors, 
mechanical sensors in liquid solution, thin film sensors (7 lectures). 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Khanna, V. K., (2011), Nanosensors: Physical, Chemical, and Biological, CRC Press. 
2. Atta, N. F., (2014), Nanosensors: Materials and Technologies. IFSA Publishing. 
3. Meyyappan, M., (2004), Carbon Nanotubes: Science and Applications, 1st Edition, CRC 
Press. 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112108092 
2. https://www.coursera.org/learn/nanotechnology/home 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25  
Title Additive Manufacturing Number MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Program Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. cover scientific as well as technological aspects of various additive, subtractive and 
formative rapid manufacturing processes. 
2. cover wide range of contemporary methodologies/technologies and tools for rapid 
manufacturing. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. appreciate process flow and working principles for various additive manufacturing 
processes 
2. deal with challenges faced during additive manufacturing of components 
 
Contents 
1. Introduction: Mass production and customization, Classification of processes, process 
chain for AM (4 Lectures) 
2. Data Preparation: Data formats, data conversion, data validity checks, data repair (4 
Lectures) 
3. Process Planning Stage: Slicing Algorithms, Part Depositions and Orientation, Direct 
Slicing, STEP related details (6 Lectures) 
4. AM Processes: FDM of polymers, metals and ceramics, Laminated Object manufacturing, 
Shaped Deposition ma nufacturing, Sterolithography and liquid based systems, Laser 
Sintering technologies, 3 -D Printing, Direct Metal Deposition, Electron and Laser beam 
technologies, Subtractive and Formative Rapid manufacturing processes (14 Lectures) 
5. Rapid Tooling (2 Lectures) 
6. Hybrid Processes (4 Lectures) 
7. Process Selection, Applications, Capabilities and Challenges (8 Lectures) 
 
Reference Books 
1. Gibson, I, Rosen, D W, and Stucker, B, Additive Manufacturing Methodologies: Rapid 
Prototyping to Direct Digital Manufacturing, Springer 
2. Hopkinson, N, Haque, R, and Dickens, P, Rapid Manufacturing: An Industrial Revolution 
for a DigitalAge: An Industrial Revolution for the Digital Age, Wiley 
3. Bartolo,P J (editor),Virtual and Rapid Manufacturing: Advanced Research in Virtual and 
Rapid Prototyping, Taylor and Francis 
4. Chua, C K, Leong, K F, Lim C S, Rapid Prototyping, World Scientific 
 
Online Course Material: 
1. https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/112104156/ 
26  
Title Robotics Number MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3-0-2 [4] 
Offered for B. Tech (ME), M. Tech(AMD) and PhD Type Program Core 
Prerequisite  
Objectives 
1. To introduce fundamental aspects of modeling and control of robot manipulators. 
2. To provide a brief of results from geometry, kinematics, dynamics, motion planning and 
control 
Learning Outcomes 
1. The course will equip students with theoretical and practical knowledge of robot modeling, 
programming and control. 
Contents: Fractal 1: Robot Modeling [MEL7XX1] [1 -0-0] 
1. Rotational Transformations, Composition of Rotations , Parameterizations of Rotations, 
Rigid Motions, Homogeneous Transformations (2 lectures) 
2. Forward and Inverse Kinematics – Kinematic Chains, Forward Kinematics: The Denavit - 
Hartenberg Convention, Inverse Kinematics, Kinematic Decoupling (4 lectures) 
3. Velocity Kinematics – The Jacobian: Angular and Linear Velocity: The General Case, 
Derivation of the Jacobian, Analytical Jacobian, Singularities, Inverse Velocity and 
Acceleration (4 lectures) 
4. Robot Dynamics: Equations of Motion, Kinetic and Potential Energy, Euler-Lagrange 
Equations, Properties of Robot Dynamic Equations, Recursive Newton-Euler Formulation (4 
lectures) 
Fractal 2: Motion Planning and Programming [MEL7XX2] [1 -0-0] 
1. Path and Trajectory Planning: Path vs. Trajectory, The Configuration Space, Path Planning 
Using Configuration Space, Potential Fields, Trajectory Planning, Point To Point Motion, 
Paths Specified by Via Points, Probabilistic Roadmap Planner (5 lectures) 
2. Vision-Based Control: The Geometry of Image Formation, Camera Calibration, Camera 
Motion and Interaction Matrix, Image -Based Control Laws, Relation between End Effector 
and Camera Motions, Partitioned Approaches (4 lectures) 
3. Robot Operating System (ROS): Basic ROS concepts, Writing RoS Programs, Log Messages, 
Graph Resource Name, Launch Fi les, Parameters, Services, Recording and Replaying 
Services (5 lectures) 
Fractal 3: Robot Control[MEL7XX3] [1-0-0] 
1. Sensors and Actuators: Joint Actuating Systems, Drives, Proprioceptive Sensors, 
Exteroceptive Sensors (3 lectures) 
2. Linear Control: Feedback and closed-loop control, second-order linear systems, control of 
second-order systems, Control -law partitioning, trajectory -following control, disturbance 
rejection, continuous vs. Discrete time control, modeling and control of a single joint, 
architecture of an industrial-robot controller (3 lectures) 
3. Nonlinear control: Nonlinear and time -varying systems, multi -input, multi-output control 
systems, control of manipulators, practical considerations, current industrial -robot control 
systems, lyapunov stability analysis, cartesian-based control systems, adaptive control (4 
lectures) 
4. Force Control: Interaction with Environment, Compliance Control, Impedance Control, 
Force Control, Hybrid Force/Motion control (4 lectures) 
Laboratory Classes (12 exercises) 
DH Param eters, Forward and Inverse Kinematics of Robot, Robot Trajectory Planning, 
Robot Operating System (ROS), Control of Robot through ROS, Path Planning, Vision Based 
control, Force Control 
Reference Books 
1. Saha S. K., Introduction to robotics. Tata McGraw-Hill Education 
2. Spong M. W., Hutchinson, S., and Vidyasagar, M., Robot modeling and control. New York: 
Wiley. 
3. O'Kane J. M., A Gentle Introduction to ROS, ISBN 978-1492143239 
4. Craig J. J, Introduction to robotics: mechanics and control. Pearson/Prentice Hall. 
Self Learning Material 
1. https://see.stanford.edu/Course/CS223A 
27  
Title Sensors and IoT Lab Number EEP7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 0–0–2 [1] 
Offered for M. Tech. 1st year Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
 
Objective 
1. To introduce students with sensors fabrication 
2. To familiarize students with measurement instruments like Spectrum and Vector Network 
Analyzer 
3. To introduce students with various kits and components required for IoT applications 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Familiarization with sensor fabrication process and characterization 
2. Handling high frequency measurement instruments 
3. Implementation of various circuits required to build a transceiver 
 
Contents 
 
The lab course will be dependent on the various core and elective components of the progra m. 
There will be a scope for modifying the contents depending on the recent developments in 
technology. Experiments from some of the following topics will be part of this lab. 
 
• Implementation of Signal Conditioning Circuits 
• Implementation of IoT components using Hardware/Software 
• Sensor interfacing using off-the-shelf components 
• Sensor Design, Fabrication and Characterization (Part of this in winter internship) 
• RF components characterization; Antennas and RF amplifiers 
• Implementation of real time examples of IoT using Embedded Systems 
• Selected experiments from Communication Systems 
• Recent topics of interest 
28  
Title Industry 4.0 Applications in 
Manufacturing Systems 
Number MEL7XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 1-0-0 [1] 
Offered for  Type Program Core 
Prerequisite  
 
Objectives: 
The Instructor will: 
1. provide brief understanding about Industry 4.0 concepts in manufacturing systems 
 
Learning Outcomes: 
The students are expected to appreciate: 
1. current trends at system level in manufacturing organizations 
2. the importance of industry 4.0 concepts at manufacturing systems 
 
Contents: 
Introduction to Manufacturing systems (2 Lecture) 
Automated Manufcturing Systems: Concept of Group Technology and cellular 
manufacturing, Flexible Manufacturing Systems, Lean Manufacturing, Agile Manufacturing 
(6 Lectures) 
Industry 4.0 for Manufacturing Systems: Agent Based Manufacturing, Cloud Based 
Manufacturing (6 Lectures) 
Reference Books: 
1. Talavage J., and Hanman R. G, Flexible Manufacturing Systems in Practice, Taylor and 
Francis 
2. Gunasekaran A., Agile Manufacturing: 21st Century Competitive Strategy, Elsevier 
3. Wang L., and Vincent W. X., Cloud Based Cyber-Physical Systems in Manufacturing, 
Springer 
 
Self-Learning Material: 
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106105195/10 
29  
Group 2: Reactive Chemical Processing 
 
Title Molecular Modelling of Catalytic 
Reactions 
Number CHL7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 3-0-0 (3) 
Offered for M.Tech., M.Tech-Ph.D. Dual Degree Type Program Elective 
Prerequisite Basic knowledge of Chemical Kinetics   
 
Objectives: 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide the knowledge in experimental and theoretical aspects of catalytic reactions, 
with primary emphasis on understanding of reaction mechanisms. 
2. Introduce interesting recent trends in research and development of a heterogeneous 
catalyst, in which experimental results are inferred by quantum mechanical 
simulations, so as to develop a molecular level understanding of the catalytic 
reactions. 
 
Learning Outcomes: 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the experimental and theoretical aspects of catalytic reactions and recent 
trends in research and development of a heterogeneous catalyst, in which 
experimental results are inferred by quantum mechanical simulations. 
2. Develop a molecular level understanding of the catalytic reactions. 
 
Contents: 
Principles of Molecular Heterogeneous Catalysis: Sabatier principle, Catalytic Cycle, Transition 
State Theory, Ensemble Effect, Defect Sites, Cluster-Size Effects, Metal-support 
Interactions, Structural Effects, Quantum Size Effects, Electron Transfer Effects, Bronsted- 
Evans-Polanyi Relations, Reactivity of Transition-Metal Surfaces. (8 lectures) 
 
Kinetics of Catalytic Reactions: Adsorption, Desorption and Surface Reactions, Reaction on 
Uniform and Non-Uniform Surfaces, Structure Sensitive and Non-Sensitive reactions on 
Metals. (4 lectures) 
 
Chemisorption & Quantum Chem: Chemical Bond, Bonding to Transition Metals, 
Chemisorption. (8 lectures) 
 
Introduction to Density Functional Theory: Born–Oppenheimer approximation, Hartree-Fock 
Theory, Self-Consistent Field, Kohn-Sham Density Functional Theory, Bloch’s Theorem 
       and Plane Wave Basis Set. (6 lectures) 
 
Computational Methods: Electronic Structure Methods, Potential Energy Surface, Exchange- 
Correlation Functional, Pseudo-Potential, Search for Transition State, Dimer Method, 
Nudged Elastic Band Method, Density of States. (8 lectures) 
 
Molecular Modelling: Catalysis by Metals, Oxides, Sulfides and Zeolites. Aqueous Phase 
Heterogeneous Catalysis and Electrocatalysis. (8 lectures) 
 
Text Book 
1. Rutger A. van Santen, Matthew Neurock, Molecular Heterogeneous Catalysis: A 
Conceptual and Computational Approach , 1st edition (March 10, 2006), Wiley -VCH, 
ISBN: 978-3-527-29662-0 
Reference Books 
1. Chorkendorff, J. W. Niemantsverdriet, 2007, Concepts of Modern Catalysis and 
Kinetics, Wiley VCH, 2nd edition (22 August 2007), ISBN: 978-3527316724 
2. David Sholl, Janice A Stecke, 2009, Density Functional Theory: A Practical 
Introduction, Wiley-Interscience; 1 edition (April 13, 2009), ISBN: 978-0470373170 
30  
3. M. Albert Vannice,2005, Kinetics of Catalytic Reactions, Springer; 2005 edition 
(August 24, 2005) 
4. Wolfram Koch, Max C. Holthausen, 2001, A Chemist's Guide to Density Functional 
Theory, Wiley-VCH; 2 edition (July 11, 2001), ISBN: 978-3527303724 
5. Michel Boudart, 1984, Kinetics of Heterogeneous Catalytic Reactions, Princeton 
University Press (1984), ISBN: 978-0691083476 
31  
Title Heterogeneous Catalysis and 
Catalytic Reactors 
Number CHL7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 3-0-0 (3) 
Offered for M.Tech., M.Tech-Ph.D. Dual 
Degree 
Type Programme Elective 
Prerequisite Basic knowledge of Chemical 
Kinetics 
  
Objective 
The Instructor will: 
1. Impart knowledge about the basic concepts, detailed structures, preparatio n methods 
and reactivities of solid catalysts, its properties and relationship between the 
structures and reactivities. 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand and gain knowledge of the detailed structures, prepara tion methods and 
reactivities of solid catalysts, its properties and relationship between the structures 
and reactivities. 
Contents 
Introduction to basic concepts (2 lectures) 
 
Catalysis: Acid-base catalysis, application of catalyst functionality concepts for control of 
reaction selectivity and kinetic models, Properties of catalysts, reaction selectivity and 
kinetic models (10 lectures) 
 
Steps in catalytic reaction: Adsorption, Kinetic models, intraparticle transport process, 
Selection and design of catalysts, Preparation and characterization of catalysts, Catalyst 
deactivation, various deactivation models, Optimal distribution of catalyst in a pellet (14 
lectures) 
 
Zeolites: Preparation and characterization of various Zeolite catalysts and their application 
(4 lectures) 
 
Commercial Reactors and catalysts: Adiabatic, fluidized bed, trickle bed, slurry; industrially 
important catalysts, Environmental catalysis (8 lectures) 
 
Design of Catalytic Reactors for gas and two phase systems, Design of polymeric reactors. (4 
lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. Sharma M.M. and Doraiswamy, Heterogeneous Reactions, Vol 1 and Vol II 
2. Thomas, J.M., Thomas W.J., Principles and practice of heterogeneous Catalysis. 
Reference Books 
1. Bruce Gates , Catalytic Chemistry. 
2. Morbidelli and Verma , Optimal distribution of catalyst in a pellet. 
3. Ford M.E. and Marcel Dekker, Catalysis of Organic reactions. 
Online Course Material 
1. Pant, K.K., Heterogeneous Catalysis and Catalytic Processes, NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Chemical Engineering, IIT Delhi, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/102/103102012/ 
32  
Title Characterization of Multiphase 
Reactors 
Number CHL7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 3-0-0 (3) 
Offered for M.Tech., M.Tech-Ph.D. Dual Degree Type Programme 
Elective 
Prerequisite Basic knowledge of Chemical Kinetics   
Objective 
The Instructor will: 
1. Impart knowledge of modern characterization techniques useful for reaction 
engineering R&D and operation of chemical plants. 
2. Introduce the students to analytical techniques, catalyst characterization techniques, 
and flow characterization techniques. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Have the understanding and knowledge of modern characterization techniques useful 
for reaction engineering R&D and operation of chemical plants. 
2. Apply the analytical techniques, catalyst characterization techniques, flow 
characterization techniques, in real systems. 
 
Contents 
Characterization in Chemical Reaction Engineering: Introduction, Data Analysis and 
presentation, Data reporting methods, principles of measurement techniques (7 lectures) 
 
Catalyst preparation and characterization: Principle of catalyst characterisation, determination 
of surface area and pore volume, pore size distribution of the catalyst, Understanding the 
surface morphologies and Chemical analysis of the catalyst (14 lectures) 
 
Flow characterization in multiphase reactors : Introduction, Intrusive vs. Non -intrusive 
measurements, Pressure probes and voidage probes, data analysis and demonstration, 
Velocity measurement methods and demonstration (14 lectures) 
 
Tomography methods : Introduction, gamma -ray tomography, electrical capacitance/ 
resistance tomography and demonstration (4 lectures) 
 
Measurement of mass and heat transfer coefficients and demonstration (3 lectures) 
 
Text Book 
1. Chaouki, J., Larachi, F., & Dudukovic, M. P. (Eds.). (1997). Non-invasive monitoring of 
multiphase. Elsevier. 
Reference Book 
1. Perry’s Chemical Engineer’s Handbook 8th Edition 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
33  
Title Advanced Wastewater Treatment Number CHL7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 3-0-2 (4) 
Offered for M.Tech., M.Tech-Ph.D. Dual Degree Type Programme Elective 
Prerequisite None   
Objective 
The instructor will: 
1 Impart comprehensive knowledge of industrial and municipal wastewater. 
2. Discuss mechanism and methodologies for waste water treatment. 
3. Discuss case studies 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the: 
1 Comprehensive knowledge of the wastewater treatment. 
2. Knowledge of advanced methodologies such as wastewater management, recycle and 
reuse. 
Contents 
Introduction: Waste water engineering: an overview, characterisation of wastewater and 
monitoring of industrial and municipal wastewater, emerging contaminants, environmental 
impacts of wastewater constituents. (4 lectures) 
Conventional Water/ Wastewater Treatment: Existing unit operations and processes, basic 
philosophy of water and wastewater treatment plants; physio-chemical treatment 
methods: (i) Screening, (ii) conventional filtration (iii) coagulation, (iv) flocculation, (v) 
floatation (vi) Clari-flocculation (vii) sedimentation, (viii) sand filtration, etc. (10 lectures) 
Aerobic and Anaerobic Suspended and Attached Growth Wastewater Treatment Processes: 
Aerated lagoon, activated sludge systems, trickling filter, sequential batch reactor, fluidized  
bed bioreactors, Up-flow Anaerobic Sludge Blanket (UASB) and hybrid Up-flow Anaerobic 
Sludge Blanket (UASB) reactors. (8 lectures) 
Advanced Treatment Processes: Membrane Filtration, microfiltration, ultrafiltration , 
nanofiltration, reverse osmosis and electrodialysis; wet air oxidation, adsorption and ion - 
exchange; wet -land and root -zone treatment of industrial and municipal wastes; design of 
sludge drying beds, thermal and biological processes for sludge and land fillings. membrane 
reactors, new technologies for wastewater disinfection. (12 lectures) 
Water Recycling and Reuse: Different unit operations for water recycling depending on end  
use, energy considerations, recovery of valuables from wastewater, zero liqu id discharge 
(ZLD). (8 lectures) 
Waste Water Treatment Design Lab (28 hrs) 
Clarifier 
Aerator 
Sand filtration system 
Municipal waste water system 
Grey water treatment system 
Sewage water treatment system 
Industrial waste water systems 
Pond water treatment 
Text Book 
1. Burton F.L., Tchobanoglous G., Stensel H.D., 2017, Waste Water Engineering Treatment 
and Reuse, 4thed.,Tata McGraw-Hill. 
2. Arceivala S.J. and Asolekar S.R., 2007, Wastewater Treatment for Pollution Control and 
Reuse, 3rd Ed., Tata McGraw Hill. 
Reference Books 
1. Henze M., van-Loosdrecht M.C.M., Ekama G.A. and Brdjanovic D., 2008, Biological 
Wastewater Treatment: Principles, Modelling and Design, IWA publishing. 
2. Sincero A.P. and Sincero G.A., 1996, Environmental Engineering – A Design Approach, 
Prentice-Hall. 
Online Course Material 
1. Tiwari M K, Wastewater treatment and recycling, NPTEL course material, Department of 
Civil Engineering, IIT Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105105178/ 
34  
 
Title Chemical Reactor Analysis Number CHL7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 3-0-2 (4) 
Offered for M.Tech., M.Tech-Ph.D. Dual Degree Type Programme Elective 
Prerequisite Basic knowledge of Chemical Kinetics   
Objective 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide in-depth knowledge of reaction kinetics and chemical reactors. 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Have comprehensive knowledge of reaction kinetics and chemical reactors. 
 
Contents 
Introduction: Review of design of ideal isothermal homogeneous reactors for single reaction. (3 
lectures) 
 
Reactor design: Design of ideal isothermal reactors for multiple reactions. Definition of 
Residence time distribution (RTD), interpretation of the data, Flow models for non-ideal 
reactors – axial dispersion, N-tanks in series, and multi-parameter models, reactor 
diagnosis, influence of RTD and micro-mixing on conversion. (14 lectures) 
 
Reactor operation: Adiabatic operations and non-adiabatic, optimal temperature, progression, 
hot spot in tubular reactor, auto-thermal operation and steady state multiplicity in 
continuously stirred tank reactor (CSTR) and tubular reactors, introduction to bifurcation 
theory. (13 lectures) 
 
Multiphase catalytic reactors: Introduction, effectiveness factor, selectivity, catalyst 
deactivation, use of pseudo-homogeneous models for design of heterogeneous catalytic 
reactors (fixed and fluidized beds), Gas-liquid-solid reactors, hydrodynamics and design of 
bubble column, slurry and trickle-bed reactors. (12 lectures) 
 
Design and Analysis Lab (28 hrs) 
Design of isothermal reactors (2) 
Residence time distribution (2) 
Multiphase reactors (2) 
Design method of different columns (2) 
Continuously stirred tank reactor (4) 
Tubular reactor (4) 
Batch reactor (4) 
Plug flow reactor (4) 
Laminar floe reactor (4) 
 
Text Books 
1. Froment G.F. and Bischoff K.B., 1990, Chemical Reactor Analysis and Design, 2nd Ed., 
Wiley. 
2. Fogler H.S., 2006, Elements of Chemical Reaction Engineering, 4th Ed., Prentice-Hall. 
3. Levenspiel O., 1999, Chemical Reaction Engineering, 3rd Ed., Wiley. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Doraiswamy L.K. and Sharma M.M., “Heterogeneous Reactions Analysis. Vol. 1: Gas- 
Solid and Solid-Solid Reactions”, Wiley. 
2. Doraiswamy L.K. and Sharma M.M., “Heterogeneous Reactions Analysis. Vol. 2: Gas- 
Solid and Solid-Solid Reactions”, Wiley. 
 
 
35  
 
Title Selected Topics in Reactive Chemical 
Processing 
Number CHL7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 3-0-0 (3) 
Offered for M.Tech. / M.Tech.-Ph.D. Dual Degree Type Elective 
Prerequisite To be declared by the instructor   
Objective 
The instructor wil l provide: 
1. In -depth coverage on specific topics within the reaction engineering domain, as 
determined by the instructor(s) and declared to students before or at the time of 
registration. 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have: 
1. the in-depth knowledge in specific topic within the reaction engineering domain. 
Contents 
The topics may be further updated according to the instructor. 
Textbook 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
Reference Books 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
  
36  
 
Title Recent Advances in Reactive 
Chemical Processing 
Number CHL7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 2-0-0 (2) 
Offered for M.Tech./ M.Tech.- Ph.D. Dual Degree Type Elective 
Prerequisite To be declared by instructor   
 
Objective 
The instructor will provide: 
1. Focussed and modular coverage on multiple topics of current interest in Reaction 
Engineering. The topics to be covered will depend on the instructor, but will relate to 
advanced research level material. 
(To be taken by students specifically interested in the corresponding areas of 
research.) 
 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have 
1. the in-depth insight in the corresponding area of research. 
 
Contents 
The topics may be further updated according to the instructor. 
 
Textbook 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Reference Books 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
37  
 
 
Title Current Topics in Reactive 
Chemical Processing 
Number CHL7XX0 
Department Chemical 
Engineering 
L-T-P (C) 1-0-0 (1) 
Offered for M.Tech. / M.Tech.- Ph.D. Dual Degree Type Elective 
Prerequisite To be declared by the instructor   
 
Objective 
The instructor will pr ovide: 
2. In -depth coverage on current topics in the area of reaction engineering, as 
determined by the instructor(s) and declared to students before or at the time of 
registration. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have: 
2. the in -depth knowl edge in specific topic in the field of reaction engineering and 
apply the knowledge in the field of reaction engineering to specific areas of 
research. 
 
Contents 
The topics may be further updated according to the instructor. 
 
Textbook 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
Reference Books 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
38  
Group 3: Petroleum and Petrochemicals  
 
Title Petroleum Refinery Engineering Number CHL7XX 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 3-0-2 (4) 
Offered for M.Tech., M.Tech-Ph.D. Dual Degree Type Programme Elective 
Prerequisite Knowledge of Mass Transfer   
Objective 
The Instructor will provide: 
1. Thorough understanding in the area of petroleum oil processing and new trends in 
refinery operations. 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have: 
1. comprehensive knowledge of petroleum oil processing and new trends in refinery 
operations. 
 
Contents 
Prelude to Petroleum Refinery Engineering: Composition of petroleu m, range of refinery 
products (6 lectures) 
Processes in Petroleum Refinery Engineering: Catalytic cracking, Delayed coking, 
hydrogenation and hydrocracking, Isomerization, Alkylation and Polymerization, Pyrolysis 
of Naptha and light hydrocarbons (14 lectures) 
Design in Petroleum Refinery Engineering: Design of crude oil distillation column, Furnace 
design (12 lectures) 
Lube oil manufacturing (4 lectures) 
Energy conservation and new trends in petroleum refinery operations (6 lectures) 
 
Design Lab (28 hours) 
Crude Oil Distillation Column Design 
Components Design 
Catalytic cracking unit 
Furnace Design 
Problem on energy conservation 
Waste heat utilization 
Efficiency enhancement 
Pollution reduction 
Wealth from waste 
Recycling and reuse 
 
Textbook 
1. Nelson, Wilbur L. (1958), Petroleum refining engineering, McGraw-Hill, New York 
Reference Books 
1. Watkins, Robert N. (1979) Petroleum refinery distillation, Gulf Publishing Company, 
Book Division, Houston TX 
2. Meyers, Robert Allen, and Robert Allen Meyers, (2004) Handbook of petroleum  
refining processes, New York: McGraw-Hill 
3. Speight, James G., and BakiOzum (2001) Petroleum refining processes. CRC Press 
4. Edmister, Wc, and B. I. Lee, (1961) Applied Hydrocarbon Thermodynamics, Gulf Pub. 
Co.,Houston 
5. Daubert, T. E., and R. P. Danner. API technical data book-petroleum refining.  
American Petroleum Institute (API), Washington DC (1997) 
Online Course Material 
1. Pant, K.K. and Kunzru, D., Petroleum Refinery Engineering, NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Chemical Engineering, IIT Del hi and Department of Chemical 
Engineering, IIT Kanpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/102/103102022/ 
 
 
 
 
39  
 
 
Title Petrochemical Technology Number CHL7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 3-0-0 (3) 
Offered for M.Tech., M.Tech-Ph.D. Dual Degree Type Programme 
Elective 
Prerequisite Basic knowledge of Chemical Engineering   
Objective 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide comprehensive knowledge and understanding in the area of petrochemicals 
and new trends in petrochemical industries. 
2. Focus on the conventional processes in downstream petrochemical industries, 
particularly oil derivatives, polymers, materials, detergents and synthesis gas 
derivatives. New innovations in the petrochemicals sector will be highlighted. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have: 
1. good understanding of petrochemicals and new trends in petrochemical industries, as 
well as conventional processes in downstream petrochemical industries, particularly 
oil derivatives, polymers, materials, detergents and synthesis gas derivatives. 
 
Contents 
Introduction: Composition of petroleum, laboratory tests, refinery products. (5 lectures) 
Petrochemical industries: Indian Scenario. (1 lecture) 
Feed stocks for petrochemical Industries. (2 lectures) 
Introduction to Catalytic cracking, Catalytic reforming, Delayed coking, Hydrogenation 
and Hydrocracking, Isomerization, Alkylation and Polymerization. (4 lectures) 
Purification of gases, Separation of aromatics by various Techniques. (4 lectures) 
Petrochemicals from Methane. (2 lectures) 
Petrochemicals from Ethane – Ethylenes – Acetylene. (3 lectures) 
Petrochemicals from C3, C4 and higher Hydrocarbons. (3 lectures) 
Synthetic Gas Chemicals. (1 lectures) 
Polymers from Olefins. (5 lectures) 
Petroleum Aromatics. (3 lectures) 
Synthetic Fibers, Rubber , Plastics and Synthetic Detergents. (3 lectures) 
Energy conservation in petrochemical Industries. (1 lecture) 
Pollution control in Petrochemical Industries. (2 lectures) 
New Trends in petrochemical Industry. (1 lecture) 
Planning and commissioning of a petrochemicals complex. (2 lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. Hatch, Lewis Frederic, and Sami Matar, 1981, From hydrocarbons to petrochemicals, 
Gulf Publishing Company, Book Division, 1981. 
2. Meyers, Robert, and Robert Allen Meyers, eds., 2005, Handbook of petrochemicals 
production processes. McGraw-Hill. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Spitz, Peter H. Petrochemicals: the rise of an industry. New York: Wiley, 1988. 
2. Articles related to new trends in Petrochemical Industries published in various 
Chemical Engineering journals. 
 
 
 
 
  
40  
 
 
 
Title Petroleum Production Engineering Number CHL7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 3-0-0 (3) 
Offered for M.Tech., M.Tech-Ph.D. Dual Degree Type Programme Elective 
Prerequisite Basic knowledge of Chemical 
Engineering Concepts 
  
Objective 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide in-depth understanding of oil production engineering concepts, well drilling, 
well completions, artificial lift mechanism, how to find a non-performing well in a 
reservoir, finding the remedy using well logging and well stimulation. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Have understanding of oil production engineering concepts, well drilling, well 
completions, artificial lift mechanism, finding a non-performing well in a reservoir, 
finding the remedy using well logging and well stimulation. 
 
Contents 
Introduction to oil reservoirs. (3 Lectures) 
Basic reservoir engineering concepts (porosity, permeability, darcy’s law) (3 Lectures) 
Different drive mechanisms of reservoir, different artificial lifts used in the wells. (4 
Lectures) 
Basic concepts of production engineering (tests run in wells to evaluate performance, 
parameters defining flow in a well). (5 Lectures) 
IPR (inflow performance curve), VLP (vertical lift performance), Vogel equation, flow in pipe. 
(5 Lectures) 
Well analysis tools (4 Lectures) 
Problem identification and remediation in well. (6 Lectures) 
Logging and well stimulation techniques. (6 Lectures) 
Production well simulation or Sand control and horizontal wells. (6 Lectures) 
 
Text Book 
Michael J. Economides, A. Daniel Hill and Christine Ehlig-Economides, Petroleum Production 
System, PTR Prentice Hall, Inc, New Jersey, 1994. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
41  
 
 
 
Title Petroleum Reservoir 
Engineering 
Number CHL7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 3-0-0 (3) 
Offered for M.Tech., M.Tech-Ph.D. Dual Degree Type Programme Elective 
Prerequisite Basic Knowledge of Chemical 
Engineering Concepts 
  
Objective 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide in-depth understanding of petroleum reservoir engineering from basic model 
to production forecast. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Have the knowledge of petroleum reservoir engineering, recovery mechanism and 
reservoir simulation. 
 
Contents 
Introduction of oil reservoirs/ static model and dynamic model. (2 lectures) 
Rock properties: porosity, permeability, compressibility, wettability, capillary pressure, 
relative permeability, building a reservoir description. (6 lectures) 
Fluid properties: formation volume factor, gas oil ratio, viscosity, tests for oil 
characterization. (6 lectures) 
Oil in place numbers, definition of reserves, resources, different methods of reserves 
estimation, material balance for hydrocarbon reservoirs (3 lectures) 
Pressure transient analysis. (4 lectures) 
Recovery mechanisms 1. Primary: solution gas drive, gas cap drive, water drive. (4 
lectures) 
Recovery mechanisms 2. Secondary: gas injection, water flooding, Buckley-Leverett 
theory. (4 lectures) 
Recovery mechanisms 3. Tertiary recovery: chemical methods, thermal methods. (4 
lectures) 
Production forecasts. (4 lectures) 
Reservoir simulations. (5 lectures) 
 
Text Book 
1. Dake, L.P., 2020, Fundamentals of reservoir engineering, (Reprint edition), Elsevier. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Larry, W. Lake, 1996, Enhanced Oil Recovery, Prentice Hall 
2. Buckley, S. E. and Leverett, M. C., 1942, Mechanism of fluid displacement in sands, 
Trans. AIME, 146, 107-116 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
42  
 
 
Title Process Safety & Hazards Number CHL7XX 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 3-0-0 (3) 
Offered for M.Tech., M.Tech-Ph.D. Dual 
Degree 
Type Programme Elective 
Prerequisite Basic Knowledge of Chemical 
Engineering 
  
Objective 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide comprehensive knowledge of safety regulations and their practices, 
chemical plant hazards and their control, risk assessment and manage ment 
principles and techniques and accident analysis. 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Identify and distinguish typical sources of risk and hazard in a process plant, 
undertake hazard and operability (HAZOP) study. 
Contents 
Safety in Industries: Concepts and definition, storage of dangerous materials, Plant layout 
Safety systems, Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) incidence rate, 
Fatal accident rate (FAR), Measures to take during accidents, Toxicology (10 lectures) 
Industrial Hygiene: Government regulations, Industrial hygiene and safety aspects related 
to 
toxicity, noise, pressure, temperature, vibrations, radiation etc, Evaluation Methods, 
Evaluating workers Exposures to dusts, noise. (8 lectures) 
Selection Mechanism: Technology and process selection, Scale of disaster, Fire triangle 
Ignition, Confined and unconfined explosion, Vapors cloud explosions, Boiling liquid 
expanding vapor explosion (BLEVE), Dust explosion, shock wave, Flammability 
characteristics of liquids and vapors, Minimum oxygen concentration (MOC) and 
Inerting. 
(8 lectures) 
Handling Chemicals and toxicity: Control of toxic chemicals, Storage and handling of 
flammable and toxic chemical, Runway reactions, Relief system risk and hazards 
management, Design to prevent Fires and Explosions, Miscellaneous Design for 
preventing Fires and Explosion. (8 lectures) 
Hazards Identification: checklists, Surveys, Hazard and Operability Studies (HAZOP), 
Safety 
reviews. Risk Assessment, Hazard models and risk data. Tackling disasters, plan for 
emergency. Risk management routines, Emergency shutdown systems, Role of 
computers in safety, Prevention of hazard human element, Technology and process 
selection. (8 lectures) 
Text Books 
1. Daniel A. Crowl and Joseph F. Louvar, 1990, Chemical Process Safety: 
Fundamentals with applications, Prentice Hall, Inc. 
2. Lee, F.P., 1983, Loss prevention in the process Industries, Volume 1 and 2 
Butterworth. 
3. Hoboken, N. J., 2000, Guidelines for Chemical Process Quantitative Risk Analysis, 
Wiley-Interscience. 
Reference Books 
1. R. W. King and J. Magid, Industrial Hazards and Safety Handbook, Butterworth, 
1982. 
2. G. L. Wells, Safety in Process Plant Design, John Wiley and Sons Inc., 1980. 
3. Fawcett, H.H. and W.S. Wood, Safety and Accident Prevention in Chemical 
Operations, 2nd Edition, Wiley-Interscience, New York, 1982. 
Online Course Material 
1. Sinha, S., Chemical Process Safety, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Chemical 
Engineering IIT Roorkee, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/107/103107156/ 
 
43  
 
 
 
Title Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA)  Number CHL7XX0 
Department (i) Chemical Engineering, (ii) Civil and 
Infrastructure Engineering 
L-T-P (C) 3-0-0 (3) 
Offered for M.Tech., M.Tech.-Ph.D. Dual Degree Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objective 
The instructor will: 
1. Impart the knowledge to the students with the methods of assessment of 
environmental impacts due to developmental and industrial activities. 
2. Expose the students with the EIA regulations and EMP. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the: 
1. In-depth knowledge of the methods of assessment of environmental impacts due 
to developmental and industrial activities. 
2. In-depth knowledge of EIA regulations and EMP. 
 
Contents 
 
Introduction to EIA; definitions and conce pts; evolution of EIA; historical development of 
EIA; forecasting environmental changes; strategic environmental assessment; water 
sensitive environment; ISO provisions; environmental clearance procedure. (11 lectures) 
 
EIA documentation and processes; pre liminary stages of EIA; project types and screening; 
impact prediction; evaluation and mitigation; EIA monitoring and auditing. (11 lectures) 
 
EIA regulations; TOR for EIAs; environmental indices; environmental legislation; EIA at 
regional level, sectoral level, and policy level; sustainable development; Environmental 
Management Plan (EMP). (11 lectures) 
 
Future strategies and EIA case studies. (9 lectures) 
 
Text Book 
1. Canter, L., Environmental Impact Assessment, McGraw Hill, New York, 1996. 
 
Reference Books 
1. World Bank, ‘Environmental Assessment Source Book’, Environment Dept., 
Washington D.C., 1991. 
2. Rau, G.J. and Wooten, C.D., Environmental Impact Analysis Handbook, McGraw Hill, 
New York, 1980. Preventive environmental management. 
 
Online Course Material 
1. Dubey, B.K., Introduction to Environmental Engineering and Science, NPTEL Course 
Material, Department of Civil Engineering, IIT Kharagpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/127105018/ 
44  
Title Hydrogen and Methanol Economy Number CH7XX0 
Department Civil Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 
Offered for MTECH, MTECH-PhD Dual Degree Type Elective 
Prerequisite none   
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide in-depth knowledge about Hydrogen and Methanol production, storage, their 
Utility and infrastructure development. 
3. Impart knowledge about the economic and environmental view point of using Hydrogen and 
Methanol as fuel sources. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have: 
1. Proper knowledge about Hydrogen and Methanol production and related issues. 
2. Economic view point of Hydrogen and Methanol as fuel and the related challenges & 
opportunities. 
 
Contents 
Hydrogen and methanol as fuels: General aspects, Prelude to the energy systems, Hydrogen 
and Methanol as energy sources, Future energy supply, Economy and E nvironment, 
Sustainability (6 Lectures) 
 
Hydrogen economy: Properties, production, storage, utilization and safely, Infrastructure 
requirement, Hydrogen as a transportation fuel, Hydrogen based fuel cell. (12 Lectures) 
 
Methanol economy: Properties, production, storage, transportation and safely, Infrastructure 
Requirement, Methanol as fuel and energy carrier, Methanol as automobile, marine and 
aviation fuel. (14 Lectures) 
 
Challenges and opportunities: Indian and global perspectives, Domestic and transportation 
application, Affordable Technology development, Policy. (6 Lectures) 
 
Case studies: Comparative study with other energy sources. (4 Lectures) 
 
Textbook 
1.  G. A. Olah, A. Goeppert, G. K. S. Prakash,(2006), Beyond Oil and Gas: The Methanol 
Economy, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany. 
2. Ball M. and Wietschel M.,(2009) The Hydrogen Economy Opportunities and Challenges, 
Cambridge University Press. 
 
Reference Books 
1.  A. Scipioni, A. Manzardo, J. Ren, (2017) Hydrogen Economy: Supply Chain, Life Cycle 
Analysis and Energy Transition for Sustainability, Academic Press. 
2. M. Bertau, H. Offermanns, L. Plass, F. Schmidt, H. Wernicke,(2014) Methanol: The Basic 
Chemical and Energy Feedstock of the Future, Springer; 2014 
45  
Title Selected Topics in Petroleum and 
Petrochemicals 
Number CHL7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 3-0-0 (3) 
Offered for M.Tech. / M.Tech.- Ph.D. Dual Degree Type Elective 
Prerequisite To be declared by the instructor   
Objective 
The instructor will provide:  
1. In-depth coverage on specific topics in the area of Petroleum and Petrochemicals. 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have: 
1.  the in-depth knowledge in specific topic in the area of Petroleum and 
Petrochemicals. 
Contents 
The topics may be further updated according to the instructor. 
Textbook 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
Reference Books 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
 
 
Title Recent Advances in Petroleum and 
Petrochemicals 
Number CHL7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 2-0-0 (2) 
Offered for M.Tech./ M.Tech.- Ph.D. Dual Degree Type Elective 
Prerequisite To be declared by instructor   
Objective 
The instructor will provide: 
1. Focussed and modular coverage on multiple topics of cu rrent interest in the area of 
Petroleum and Petrochemicals. The topics to be covered will depend on the 
instructor, but will relate to advanced research level material. 
(To be taken by students specifically interested in the corresponding areas of 
research.) 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have 
1.  the in-depth insight in the corresponding area of research and apply the knowledge  
in the corresponding area of research. 
Contents 
The topics may be further updated according to the instructor. 
Textbook 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
Reference Books 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
46  
Title Current Topics in Petroleum and 
Petrochemicals 
Number CHL7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 1-0-0 (1) 
Offered for M.Tech. / M.Tech.-Ph.D. Dual Degree Type Elective 
Prerequisite To be declared by the instructor   
Objective 
The instructor will provide: 
1.In-depth coverage on current topics in the area of Petroleum and Petrochemicals. 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have: 
1.the in-depth knowledge in specific topic in the field of Petroleum and Petrochemicals 
and apply the knowledge to specific areas of research. 
Contents 
The topics may be further updated according to the instructor. 
Textbook 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
Reference Books 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 
47  
Group 4: Additional program Electives 
 
 
Title Advanced Fluid Dynamics Number CHL7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 
Offered for BTech, MTech, PhD Type PE 
Prerequisite An introductory course on Fluid Mechanics   
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide knowledge about boundary layer theory, turbulent boundary layer, modelling of 
turbulent flow, nonnewtonian fluid and fluidization phenomena. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to gain: 
1. Understanding of boundary layer theory, turbulent boundary layer, modelling of turbulent 
flow, nonnewtonian fluid, fluidization phenomena. 
2. Understanding of design aspects of fluidization. 
 
Contents 
Momentum theorem: Equations of change, ideal flow, Eulers equations of motion, velocity 
potential, rotational and irrotational flow; Navier -Stokes equation, poiseuille flow, creep flow 
and Couette flow. [8 Lectures] 
Boundary layer: Boundary layer theory, integral momentum analysis, turbulent boundary layer, 
turbulence and mixing, universal velocity profile. [8 Lectures] 
Stability analysis: Stability analysis of laminar flow, Orr -Sommerfield solution, transition to 
turbulence, detailed modeling of turbulent flow. [8 Lectures] 
Laminar and turbulent flow: Non-newtonian fluid, rheological characteristics, consistency 
measurement, viscometric flow, pi pe and annular flow, pipeline design equations. [8 
Lectures] 
Fluidization: The phenomena of fluidization and its industrial application, characteristics of 
particles, principle of fluidization and mapping of various regimes, two phase theory of 
fluidization, bubbles in fluidized bed, entrainment. fast fluidized bed. mixing, segregation  
and gas dispersion. heat and mass transfer in fluidized bed, solid -liquid fluidized bed and 
three phase fluidized bed, design of fluidized bed reactors. [10 Lectures] 
 
Textbook 
1. Kundu, P.K. and Cohen, I.M. (2016) Fluid Dynamics, Academic Press. 
2. Muralidhar, K. and Biswas, G. (2005) Advanced Engineering Fluid Mechanics, Alpha Science 
Reference Books 
1. Deen, W.M., (2011) Analysis of Transport Phenomena, 2nd ed., Oxford. 
2. Bird, R. B., Stewart, W. E. and Lightfoot, E. N., (2002) Transport Phenomena, 2nd ed, Wiley. 
3. Kunni, B. and Levenspiel, O. (1991) Fluidization Engineering, Elsevier 
 
Online Course Material 
1. Advanced Fluid Mechanics, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112/105/112105218/ 
48  
Title Advanced Mass Transfer Number CHL7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 
Offered for BTech, MTech, PhD Type PE 
Prerequisite An introductory course on Mass Transfer   
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide in-depth knowledge about multi-component distillation, minimum reflux  ratio, 
total reflux, product distribution, flash vaporization, etc. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to gain: 
1. Understanding of multi-component distillation, minimum reflux ratio, total reflux, product 
distribution, flash vaporization, etc. 
 
Contents 
Multicomponent mass transfer: Multicomponent distillation, determination of key  
components at minimum reflux ration by the method of Shiras. [8 Lectures] 
Minimum reflux ratio by Underwoods method ; Fenske e quation for total reflux and 
computation of product distribution; Flash vaporization of feed to the distillation column; 
Rigorous methods of Lewis -Matheson, Thiele -Geddes, bubble point, sum rates method, 
Naphthali-Sandholm method. [10 Lectures] 
Absorption with chemical reaction. [8 Lectures] 
Simulation of cascade processes. [8 Lectures] 
Recent developments in mass transfer and separation processes. [8 Lectures] 
 
Text Book 
1. Ross Taylor, R. Krishna, (1993) Multicomponent Mass Transfer, John Wiley & Sons. 
2. Seader, Henley and Ropar (2011) Separation Process Principles, 3rd Edition Wiley. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Humphrey, J. L. and Keller, G. E., (1997), Separation Process Technology, McGraw- Hill, 
NY 
2. Kister, H. Z., (1992), Distillation Design, McGraw-Hill. 
Online Course Material 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/103/103103035/ 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/104/103104046/ 
https://nptel.ac.in/content/syllabus_pdf/103103034.pdf 
49  
Title Advanced Heat Transfer Number CHL7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 
Offered for BTech, MTech, PhD Type PE 
Prerequisite An introductory course on Heat Transfer   
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide in -depth knowledge about steady and unsteady state conduction in one -, two -  
and three-dimensional cases, forced convection, radiation heat transfer concepts, boiling 
heat transfer, liquid metal heat transfer etc. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to gain: 
1. Understanding of about steady and unsteady state conduction in one -, two- and three- 
dimensional case s, forced convection, radiation heat transfer concepts, boiling heat 
transfer, liquid metal heat transfer etc. 
2. Design of compact heat exchangers. 
 
Contents 
Conduction: General equation of change of energy. Steady and unsteady state conduction in 
one-, two- and three-dimensional cases. Finite difference method for steady and unsteady 
conduction. [8 Lectures] 
Forced convention heat transfer: Analytical and semi - analytical solutions. Equations for 
velocity and temperature in vertical and horizontal planes for  cylinders and spheres. [8 
Lectures] 
Radiation heat transfer: C oncepts. Angle factor calculations. Network method of analysis for 
radiation exchange. Radiation calculation through gases and vapors. [8 Lectures] 
Design of compact heat exchangers. [4 Lectures] 
Boiling heat transfer, liquid metal heat transfer. [8 Lectures] 
Selected advanced topics on heat transfer. [6 Lectures] 
 
Textbook 
1. Ozisik, M.N., [2013], Boundary Value Problems of Heat Conduction, Dover Publications 
2. Ghoshdastidar, P.S., [2012], Heat Transfer, Oxford Press. 
 
Reference Books 
3. Incropera, F. P. and Dewitt, D. P. [2006] Fundamentals of Heat and Mass Transfer, Wiley 
4. Muralidhar, K. and Sundarrajan, T. [2003] Computational Fluid flow and heat Transfer, Alpha 
Science. 
Online Course Material 
2. Advanced Heat Transfer, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/105/103105052/ 
50  
 
Title Capillarity and Wetting Number CH7LXX 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 3-0-0 (3) 
Offered for As prescribed for 700 level course Type Elective 
Prerequisite Basic course on Fluid dynamics   
Objective 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide the knowledge about fundamentals of capillarity and wetting phenomena and 
help the students to understand many small scale phenomena occurring in nature. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the basic concept of capillarity and wetting (Young Laplace law, Young 
equation, lubrication equation, Stokes equation); 
2. Understand and apply the physical principles of static and dynamic wetting; 
 
Contents 
Introduction, scope and applications (1 Lecture) 
Fundamentals (Molecular) of interaction force and interfacial tensions (2 Lectures) 
Derivation of the fundamental equations of Young and Laplace (3 Lectures) 
Wetting and molecular forces (disjoining pressure) (4 Lectures) 
Wetting in external fields (2 Lectures) 
Thin film flows and lubrication (5 Lectures) 
stability and Instability analysis (Rayleigh Plateau, Rayleigh Taylor) (8 Lectures) 
Contact line dynamics (5 Lectures) 
Dewetting phenomena (4 Lectures) 
Surface tension-driven flows (4 Lectures) 
Basics of electrowetting (4 Lectures) 
 
Text Book 
1. Pierre-Gilles de Gennes, Francoise Brochard-Wyart, David Quere, 2003, Capillarity and 
Wetting Phenomena, Springer Science and Business Media, New York USA. 
Reference Books 
1. Pierre Lambert, 2013, Surface Tension in Microsystems: Engineering Below the 
Capillary Length, Springer. 
2. Dieter Langbein, 2002, Capillary Surfaces: Shape — Stability — Dynamics, in 
Particular Under Weightlessness, Springer. 
 
Online Course Material 
1. Bhaskarwar A. N., Interfacial Engineering, NPTEL course material, Department of 
Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute of Techonology Delhi, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103102016/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
51  
 
Title Principles of Electrochemical Engineering  Number CHL7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 (3) 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Program 
Elective 
Prerequisite Basic knowledge of Thermodynamics   
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide the student with the essential knowledge needed to understand electrochemical 
engineering and technology. 
2.  Illustrate the basic principles of electrochemistry, electrokinetic phenomena required for 
modelling and design of electrochemical processes and devices. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the principles of electrochemistry processes and electro-analytical methods. 
2. Correlate the principles of electrochemistry to electrochemical processes and suggest 
design solutions to engineering problems. 
 
Contents 
 
Basic Principles: Introduction t o electrochemistry and fundamentals, Nernst equation, 
Electrode kinetics, Volta and Galvani potentials, electrochemical potential, electrochemical 
equilibrium, Enthalpy and Gibbs free energy calculation, solvation energy, ionic 
equilibrium. (6 lectures) 
 
Cell potential : Electrochemical cell, standard electrode potential, Butler -Volmer formulation, 
Tafel equation, Pourbaix diagram, Activity Coefficients, Donnan potential, reversible 
electrode, Born model for ion-solvation energy, Batteries and Cell Chemistries. (7 lectures) 
 
Ion-ion interactions and ionic transport: Debye-Huckel theory, activity coefficient of ionic 
solution, ion pair, Bjerrum theory and Fuoss theory, migration, extended Nernst -Planck 
equation, electrochemical mobility and its relation with diffusivity, Stokes -Einstein 
equation, ionic conductivity, transport number, Kohlrausch law. (12 lectures) 
 
Charged interface: surface excess quantity, Lippmann equation, Gouy -Chapman model, Stern 
layer, internal and external Helmholtz layer, zeta potentia l, electric double layer. (8 
lectures) 
 
Electrochemical Kinetics: Nonequilibrium formulation, diffusion potential, junction potential, 
Planck-Henderson equation, pH electrode, electro -osmosis, electrophoresis, streaming 
potential, sedimentation potential. (7 lectures) 
Application: Electro-chemical Processes, Fuel Cells. (2 lectures) 
 
Textbook 
1. Prentice ,G., 1991, Electrochemical Engineering Principles, Prentice Hall. 
2. Girault, H., 2004, Analytical and Physical Electrochemistry, EPFL Press, 1st Edition. 
Reference Books 
1. Allen J. Bard, Larry R. Faulkner, 2005, Electrochemical Methods: Fundamentals and 
Applications, John Wiley & Sons; 2nd Edition. 
2. Fuller,T.F., Harb, J. N., 2018, Electrochemical Engineering, Wiley. 
Online Course Material 
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/104106105/ 
52  
Title Kinetics & Theory for Polymers Number CHL7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 
Offered for BTech, MTech, PhD Type Program 
Elective 
Prerequisite An introductory knowledge of polymers   
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide details on kinetics and theories relevant to polymer reactions as well as 
crystallization. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Gain knowledge about the variety of reaction mechanisms for polymerization and their 
kinetics 
2. Learn about the theories of polymer crystallization and it’s kinetics 
 
Contents 
 
Polymerization reactions and classification [3 lectures] 
Kinetics of Step Polymerization: polymerization reactions, Carothers theory for linear step 
polymerization, Statistical theor y for linear step polymerization, Kinetics of step 
polymerization, Carothers theory for gelation, Statistical theory for gelation, Validation of 
theories [12 lectures] 
Kinetics of Free Radical Polymerization: Reaction kinetics, polymerization processes, ki netics of 
living and ATRP polymerization [9 lectures] 
Kinetics of Ionic Polymerization: Kinetics of cationic polymerization, kinetics of anionic 
polymeirzation [4 lectures] 
Kinetics of Copolymerization: Reaction and kinetics [6 lectures] 
Kinetics in Polymer Crystallization: Kinetics and mechanism, melting in semicrystalline polymers 
[8 lectures] 
 
Textbook 
1. Young R.J. and Lovell P.A. (2011) Introduction to Polymers, 3rd Edition, CRC Press 
 
Reference Books 
1. Odian G., (2004) Principles of Polymerization, 4th Edition, Wiley Interscience 
53  
Title Catalytic Nanomaterials Number CHL7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 
Offered for BTech, MTech, PhD Type PE 
Prerequisite Basic knowledge of Chemical Reaction 
Engineering 
  
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide knowledge about the nano-materials in catalysis applications 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Gain knowledge about the advancements in catalytic materials and their applications 
 
Contents 
Introduction: Nano materials in catalysis, nanomaterials’ impact on catalysis, tailoring properties 
of nanocatalysts,controlling active sites on nano materials, applications. [9 lectures] 
Nano-catalyst based Technologies and Catalysis : Fuel Cell, exhaust catalysts, gas sensors, 
photocatalysis. [10 lectures] 
Nanocatalysis: catalysis by nanostructured metal particles, size -selective Fischer -Tropsch 
nanocatalyst, nano -catalyst precursors, dendrimer based nanocatalysts, olefin  
hydrogenation, nano-catalyst for heterogeneous catalysis. [14 lectures] 
Synthesis of Nano -catalyst in Supercritical fluids: Properties of supercritical fluids, nanopowder 
catalysts synthesis in SCFs, supported nano -catalysts in SCFs, supercritical microfluidics for 
nano-catalyst synthesis. [9 lectures] 
 
Textbook 
1. Serp P., Philippot K., (2013) Nanomaterials in Catalysis, Wiley 
54  
Title Mechanics of Viscoelastic Materials Number CHL7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P 
[C] 
3-0-0 
Offered for BTech, MTech, PhD Type PE 
Prerequisite Basic knowledge of polymers or viscoelastic 
materials 
  
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide detailed knowledge of viscoelasticity and it’s applications in various areas. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
Gain understanding of viscoelasticity, models for viscoelasticity and various viscoselastic  
materials. 
Get motivated to pursue further studies and research in the area of visco-elasticity. 
 
Contents 
 
Viscoelasticity: Introduction, creep and relaxation, anelastic materials, examples, Mechanical 
models, Boltzmann  superposition principle, dynamic mechanical testing, transitions and 
polymer structure, entanglements [6 lectures] 
Constitutive Relations: Predicting response of linear viscoelastic materials, fading memory,  
relation between creep and relaxation and corr esponding functions, time -temperature 
superposition, 3D linear constitutional equation, dielectric relaxation, adaptive and smart 
materials, non-linear viscoelasticity [10 lectures] 
Dynamic Behavior of Linear Solids : Internal friction, linear dynamic respo nse function, Kramers 
Kronig relation, hysterisis, lumped and distributed systems, wave propogation  and 
attenuation, non-linear materials [8 lectures] 
Linear Viscoelasticity and Viscoelastic Materials : Concepts, spectra, interrelations among spectra, 
theory of viscoelasticity, relaxation in amorphous and crystalline polymers, aging,  piezo 
electric polymers, metals, ceramics, biological materials [20 lectures] 
 
Textbook 
1. Lakes R.S., (2009) Viscoelastic Materials, Cambridge University Press 
 
Online Course Material 
1. Deshpande, A., Rheology of Complex Materials, NPTEL Course Material, Chemical 
Engineering, IIT Madras, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/106/103106131/ 
55  
Title Structure & Property for Polymers Number CHL7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 
Offered for BTech, MTech, PhD Type PE 
Prerequisite An introductory course on polymers for BTech, 
None for MTech 
  
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide knowledge about various structures in polymers and it’s relation with the mechanical 
and thermal properties 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to gain: 
1. Understanding of structure-property for various polymeric systems 
2. Understanding of thermal transition and deformation mechanisms in polymers 
 
Contents 
 
Introduction: Outline of the c ourse, review of basics of polymers, polymerization reactions and 
classification [2 lectures] 
Amorphous and Semicrystalline Polymers: Glass transition, free-volume theory, factors affecting 
glass transition temperature, solution grown single crystals and c hain-folding mechanism, 
melt crystallization, spherulites, degree of crystallinity, Bragg’s law, crystal thickness and 
chain extension, flow -induced crystallization, dimensionless numbers in crystallization, 
factors affecting melting, relationship between melting and glass transition [11 lectures] 
Multicomponent Polymeric Systems: Polymer blends, block copolymers, thermoplastic 
elastomers, examples, phase diagram, glass transition, compatibilization, morphology 
diagram [6 lectures] 
Deformation in Polymers:  Elastic deformation, stress -strain relationship, polymer chain 
deformation, crystal moduli, elastic deformation in semicrystalline polymers, yield and 
crazing – necking and its mathematical treatment, yield criteria, mechanisms, plastic 
deformation [9 lectures] 
Viscoelasticity: Introduction, examples, Mechanical models, Boltzmann superposition principle, 
dynamic mechanical testing, transitions and polymer structure, t -T superposition, 
entanglements [9 lectures] 
Polymer Composites: Matrix and fillers, comp osition, elastic deformation, fracture, packing, 
experiments, nanocomposites [5 lectures] 
 
Textbook 
1. Young R.J. and Lovell P.A. (2011) Introduction to Polymers, 3rd Edition, CRC Press 
 
Reference Books 
1. Chanda M. (2006) Introduction to Polymer Science & Chemistry, CRC Press 
 
Online Course Material 
1. Adhikari B, Science & Technology of Polymers, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Metallurgy & Material Science, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113105028/ 
 