Source: http://intra.iitj.ac.in/acad_website/pg_curriculum/PHYSICS_06092019.pdf
================================================================================

 
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur 
 
   
 
 
 
 
PG Course Booklet 
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur 
July 2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Department of Physics 
 
Two-year M.Sc. Programme 
 
Curriculum 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 
Physics is one of the oldest disciplines of Science dealing with the development of a number of 
theories that attempt to explain the origin of the Universe and also various forces that exist in 
nature. Further, the  genesis of most of the Engineering Disciplines is based on various principles 
and theories of physics. Hence, the subject of physics, on one side deals with the development of 
fundamental theories towards revealing various processes and forces in nature a nd on the other 
hand, it seamlessly interfaces with almost all disciplines of engineering wherein outcome of the 
research in physics can be translated into useful technologies and products thereby immensely 
contributing to the wellbeing of mankind. 
Objective of the Programme 
The major objective of the programme is to bring out professionals having knowledge of basic laws 
of nature together with strong fundamentals in the core area of physics viz. Classical Mechanics, 
Quantum Mechanics, Condensed Matter Phys ics, Electromagnetism, Computational Physics, 
Statistical Physics, Electronics, Atomic and Nuclear Physics and advanced level topics such as 
Quantum Information Processing, Quantum Computing, High Energy Physics, Astrophysics, Plasma 
Physics, Nanotechnolog y, Nonlinear Optics, etc. Further objective of the program is to inculcate 
certain specific enabling skill sets to prepare the students to take up challenges in any one or more 
functional domains viz. (i) Academics; (ii) Basic and Applied Research; (iii) R esearch & 
Development; (iv) Engineering & Technology and (v) Industry. 
Expected Graduate Attributes 
1. In depth understanding of the fundamental concepts of physics.  
2. Ability to undertake problems in multidisciplinary domains of Science & Technology viz. 
Space Science, Medical Physics, Plasma Science, Quantum Technologies, Advanced 
Materials Science, Computational Techniques, etc. 
3. Ability to apply the acquired knowledge of Physics to Engineering Problems. 
4. Understanding of basic tools of computational physics a nd their application in various 
domains of physics and engineering. 
5. Ability to perform the experiments and analyze the experimental data based on acquired 
knowledge in the domains of electronics, atomic and nuclear physics, condensed matter 
physics, optics and Lasers, and other advanced topics.  
6. Skills to demonstrate basic  principles of physics by use of simple experimental as well as 
high end experimental techniques. 
7. Ability to develop advanced functional materials and carry out their characterization. 
8. Ability to design, fabricate and characterize device structures such as  sensors, solar cells, 
optical components, etc. for various applications. 
9. Ability to make effective oral and written technical communication. 
10. Appreciation and adherence to norms of professional ethics. 
 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Knowledge and deep understanding of principles of basic and applied physics. 
2. Subject knowledge to pursue higher studies in the advanced physics areas, such as, High 
Energy Physics, Astrophysics, Quantum Information Processing, Nanotechnology, Plasma 
Technology, Nonlinear Optics, Fibre Optics, etc. 
3. Knowledge of fabrication and characterization of devices, such as, solar cells, gas sensor, 
energy storage, magnetic data storage, etc. 
4. Skills in certain experimental techniques for characterization of materials for their structural, 
morphological, surface topology, electrical, magnetic, dielectric and optical properties. 
5. Knowledge and skills to use various vacuum based techniques for development of thin film 
based materials, structures, and plasma devices and systems. 
6. Technical knowledge and skil ls to understand and appreciate interdisciplinary research 
topics. 
7. Skills in computational physics for wide range of applications ranging from the visualization 
of physical theories and process, design of functional materials, simulation and modeling of 
optical processes, etc. 
8. Written and Oral technical communication skills. 
 
Program Structure: 
• 60% Core courses ~ 38 credits 
• 30% Program Electives (PE) (can be opted from a list specified by the department which can 
include courses from sister departments which are relevant for the programme) ~ 18 credits 
• 10% Open electives (OE) (OE can be opted from any department as per student‟s choice); 
~ 6 credits 
OE and PE can include lab courses as well as hands-on sessions 
• Project ~ 15 credits  
• Total Credits ~ 77  
 
 
 
 
 
  
Credit Structure for M.Sc. Programs 
Type L-T-P-D Distribution of contact and beyond contact 
hours 
Total Credits 
= TH/3 
(TC) Contact 
Hours 
(CH) 
Beyond 
Contact 
Hours 
(BCH) 
Total 
Hours  
(TH) 
1 hour of Lecture 1-0-0-0 1 hr 2 hr 3 hr 1 
1 hour of Tutorial 0-1-0-0 1 hr 2 hr 3 hr 1  
1 hour of Lab/  
Hands On/ Seminar 
0-0-1-0 1 hr 0.5 hr 
 
1.5 hr 0.5 
1 hour of Project 0-0-0-1 1 hr 2 hr 3 hr 1 
Program Structure of M.Sc. Programmes 
Semester I Semester II 
Type Nos. CH BCH TH TC Type Nos. CH BCH TH TC 
Lecture 5×(3-0-
0-0) 
15 30 45 15 Lecture 5×(3-0-
0-0) 
15 30 45 15 
Lab 2×(0-0-
3-0) 
6 3 9 3 Lab 2×(0-0-
3-0) 
6 3 9 3 
Hands 
On 
1×(0-0-
3-0) 
3 1.5 4.5 1.5 Hands 
On 
1×(0-0-
3-0) 
3 1.5 4.5 1.5 
Total   24 34.5 58.5 19.5 Total   24 34.5 58.5 19.5 
Semester III Semester IV 
Type Nos. CH BCH TH TC Type Nos. CH BCH TH TC 
Lecture 4×(3-0-
0-0) 
12 24 36 12 Lecture 3×(3-0-
0-0) 
9 18 27 9 
Lab  1×(0-0-
3-0) 
3 1.5 4.5 1.5 Project (0-0-0 -
10) 
10 20 30 10 
Semina
r 
1×(0-0-
1-0) 
1 0.5 1.5 0.5       
Project (0-0-0 -
5) 
5 10 15 5       
Total   22 35 57 19 Total   19 38 57 19 
In a week: 84 hrs of working time assuming 12 hrs per day available for active work; 
after addressing curricular load demand students will have about 24 hrs of time for 
extra-curricular and co-curricular activities per week. 
 
 
Semester wise courses (Total credits – 77) 
 
I Semester 
Cat. Course Number, Course Title L-T-P Credits 
MC PHL6XX0 Mathematical Physics 3-0-0-0 3 
MC PHL6XX0 Classical Mechanics 3-0-0-0 3 
MC PHL6XX0 Quantum Mechanics 3-0-0-0 3 
MC PHL6XX0 Electronics 3-0-0-0 3 
MC PHL6XX0 Statistical Physics 3-0-0-0 3 
MC PHP6XX0 Electronics Lab 0-0-3-0 1.5 
MC PHP6XX0 Condensed Matter Physics Lab 0-0-3-0 1.5 
MC PHP6XX0Hands-on 0-0-3-0 1.5 
Total 19.5 
 
II Semester 
Cat. Course Number, Course Title L-T-P Credits 
MC PHL6XX0 Electrodynamics 3-0-0-0 3 
MC PHL6XX0 Condensed Matter Physics 3-0-0-0 3 
MC PHL6XX0 Physics of Atoms & Molecules 3-0-0-0 3 
MC PHL6XX0Nuclear & Particle Physics 3-0-0-0 3 
ME Program Elective-1 3-0-0-0 3 
MC PHP6XX0Atomic & Nuclear Physics Lab 0-0-3-0 1.5 
MC PHP6XX0Optics & Lasers Lab 0-0-3-0 1.5 
MC PHP6XX0Hands-on 0-0-3-0 1.5 
Total 19.5 
 
 
 
 
 
III Semester 
Cat. Course Number, Course Title L-T-P Credits 
ME Program Elective-2 3-0-0-0 3 
ME Program Elective-3 3-0-0-0 3 
ME Program Elective-4 3-0-0-0 3 
ME Open Elective-1 3-0-0-0 3 
MC Computational Physics Lab 0-0-3-0 1.5 
MC Seminar 0-0-1-0 0.5 
MP Project 0-0-0-5 5 
Total 19.0 
 
IV Semester 
Cat. Course Number, Course Title L-T-P Credits 
ME Program Elective-5 3-0-0-0 3 
ME Program Elective-6 3-0-0-0 3 
ME Open Elective-2 3-0-0-0 3 
MP Project 0-0-0-10 10 
Total 19.0 
 
 
  
Topic Cloud 
 
 
  

Topic Cloud Details 
 
Fundamental Physics 
1. Mathematical Physics 
2. Classical Mechanics 
3. Quantum Mechanics 
4. Statistical Physics 
5. Electronics 
6. Electrodynamics & STR 
7. Condensed Matter Physics 
8. Physics of Atoms & Molecules 
9. Nuclear & Particle Physics 
 
Multidisciplinary Science and Technology 
1. Computational Physics (Fractals with ME & Maths) 
2. High Energy Physics and Space Science 
● Introduction to Space Science 
● GTR 
● Particle Physics 
● Neutrino Telescope 
● X-ray Astronomy  
● Cosmology 
3. Nanoscience & Nanotechnology (Fractals with MT & CY)  
4. Advanced Condensed Matter Physics 
5. Introduction to Materials Characterization (Fractals with MT) 
6. Introduction to Medical Physics (Optical, radiation based, image analysis, MRI) (Fractals 
with BSBE, Electrical)  
7. Fundamentals of Plasma & Fusion Science 
8. Introduction to Quantum Technologies 
9. Laser Technologies 
10. Computational Materials Science (Fractals with MT and CY) 
11. Soft Matter Physics (Fractals with CY) 
12. Statistical methods for data analysis (Maths and Computers) 
13. Non-Perturbative Aspects of Quantum Field Theory 
14. Critical Phenomena and Renormalization Group 
 
Engineering Physics 
1. Optical Fibre Technology (Fractals with EE) 
2. Engineering Optics 
3. Energy Harvesting Technologies (Fractals with ME) 
4. Solar Energy Technologies (Fractals with ME) 
5. Quantum Optics & Engineering 
6. Cold Plasma Technologies 
7. Nuclear Engineering (Fractals with ME & EE) 
 
Teaching Laboratories 
1. Atomic & Nuclear Physics  
2. Condensed Matter Physics  
3. Electronics Laboratory 
4. Optics and Lasers 
5. Computational Physics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Core Courses 
  
Title Mathematical Physics Number PHL6XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
1. To gain the mathematical skills necessary to approach problems in fundamental and 
advanced physics courses. 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply the mathematical skills in designing problems and solving them. 
2. Will enable students to apply different transforms to solve mathematical problems of 
interest in science and engineering. 
Contents  
Complex variables: Analyticity and Cauchy -Reimann Conditions, Cauchy‟s integral theorem 
and formula, Taylor‟s series an d Laurent‟s series expansion, Branch Points and Cuts, 
Reimann Sheets and surfaces, Residues, Cauchy‟s Residue theorem, Jordan‟s Lemma to 
evaluate infinite integrals, Evaluation of definite integrals.(12 lectures) 
Differential Equations and Special Function s:Ordinary differential equations, second order 
homogeneous and inhomogeneous equations, Wronskian, General solutions, Series solution. 
Gauss hypergeometric and confluent hypergeometric equations, Sturm Liouville problem, 
Legendre, Hermite and the associat ed polynomials, Bessel functions, Integral representation 
of special functions, Applications to electrostatics and quantum mechanics.(16 lectures)  
Fourier and Laplace Transforms:Fourier transform, Sine, Cosine and Complex transforms with 
examples, Definition, Properties and Representations of Dirac Delta Function, Properties of 
Fourier Transforms, Transforms of derivatives, Parseval‟s Theorem, Convolution Theorem, 
Momentum representation, Applications to Partial differential equations, Discrete Fourier 
transform, Fast Fourier transform, Laplace transform, Convolution theorem and its 
applications, Laplace transform method of solving differential equations, Applications to 
electrostatics.(14 lectures) 
Textbook 
1. Arfken George, B. and Weber Hans, J., Mathematical Methods for Physicists , Academic 
Press, 2012.  
2. Boas Mary, L., Mathematical Methods in the Physical Sciences, John Wiley & Sons, 2005.  
Self-Learning Material 
1. Selected topics in Mathematical Physics, NPTEL course, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/115106086/ (by  Professor V. Balakrishnan, Department of 
Physics, IIT Madras). 
2. Duan L., www-personal.umich.edu 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. Mathematical physics online NPTEL course by Dr. Saurabh Basu, IIT Guwahati. 
 
 
Title Classical Mechanics Number PHL6XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide concepts and problem solving approach related to Lagrangian and Hamiltonian 
formulation in Mechanics. 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. To apply the Variational principles to physical problems. 
2. Model mechanical systems using Lagrange and Hamilton equation of motion. 
Contents  
Survey of elementary principles : review of the Newtonian mechanics, constraints, 
D'Alembert's principle, Lagrange‟s equation, Its application to simple problems. (7 Lectures)  
Central force problem : The equation of motion, the equivalent one -dimensional problem, 
classification of orbits, Virial theorem, Differential equation for the orb it, inverse square law 
of force, scattering in central force field. (7 Lectures) 
Variational Principles and Lagrange’s equations : calculus of variations, Hamilton's principle, 
derivation of Lagrange's equation from Hamilton's principle, its application, co nservation and 
symmetry property. (6 Lectures) 
Small oscillations : formulation of the problem, eigenvalue equation, principal axis 
transformation, normal coordinates, triatomic molecule free vibration, forced and damped 
vibrations. (6 Lectures) 
Rigid body motion: orthogonal transformation, the Eulerian angles, Euler‟s theorem, 
infinitesimal rotation, tensors and dyadics, force free motion of rigid body, the heavy 
symmetrical top.  (5 Lectures) 
Hamilton's equation of motion : Legendre transformations and Hami lton's equation, cyclic 
coordinates, Routh's procedure, physical significance of Hamiltonian.  (5 Lectures) 
Canonical Transformation : Examples of canonical transformations, Lagrange and Poisson 
Brackets, symmetry group of mechanical systems. (6 Lectures) 
Textbook 
1. Goldstein, H., Classical Mechanics, Pearson India Limited, New Delhi (2011). 
Reference Books  
1. Jose, J. V. and Saletan, E. J., Classical Dynamics: A Contemporary Approach , Cambridge 
University Press, (2002).  
2. Landau, L.D. and Lifshitz, E.M., Mechanics, Pergamon Press, (1960). 
Online Course Material  
1. Banerjee D., Classical Mechanics,  Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, 
Kharagpur,https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/115105098/. 
Title Quantum Mechanics Number PHL6XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce the key concepts of non-relativistic quantum mechanics. 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the basic concepts and working knowledge of non -relativistic quantum 
mechanics.  
Contents 
Origin of quantum theory: Blackbody radiation, Photoelectric effect, Compton scattering, 
Matter waves, Uncertainty principle, Stern-Gerlach experiment. (5 Lectures) 
Formalism: Linear vector spaces and operators in Hilbert space, Measurements, observables 
and the uncertainty relations, Change of basis, Momentum representations, Equations of 
motion in Schroedinger and Heisenberg pictures, One dimensional potential problems, Linear 
harmonic oscillator, Creation and annihilation operators. (10 Lectures) 
Theory of Angular Momentum: Angular momentum operators, Eigenvalues and Eigenfunctions 
of, Spherical harmonics Relation between rotat ion and angular momentum, Rotational 
symmetry and conservation of angular momentum, Reflection invariance and parity, 
Commutation rules, Matrix representations, addition of angular momenta and Clebsch -
Gordon coefficients, Pauli spin matrices. (12 Lectures)   
Approximation methods: Time independent perturbation theory, Perturbation theory for 
degenerate states, Dalgarno‟s method, Zeeman and Stark effects, WKB approximation and 
its applications, Variational method and its applications to helium atom and many particle 
systems, Time dependent Perturbation theory, Fermi‟s Golden rule, Semi classical theory of 
interaction of atoms with radiation. (13 Lectures) 
Textbook 
1. Shankar, R., Principles of Quantum Mechanics, Plenum Press, 1994. 
Reference Books 
1. Das, A., Lectures on Quantum Mechanics, Hindustan Book Agency, 2003. 
2. Sakurai, J. J., Modern Quantum Mechanics, Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, 1994. 
Self-Learning Material 
1. NPTEL Course Material, Balakrishnan, V., Department of Physics, IIT Madras 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/ 122106034/. 
2. Vuletic, V., Quantum Physics I, http://hdl.handle.net/1721.1/90372. 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. Susskind, L., https://www.courses.com/stanford -university/foundations-of-modern-
physics. 
 
Title Electronics Number PHL6XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Make the students understand the basics of electronics. 
2. Make the students understand the use of electronic devices. 
3. Make the students understand to build circuit from individual components. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Design new circuits using the electronic components. 
2. Assemble analog and digital components to make new circuit. 
 
Contents  
Transistors: JFET, transconductance, JFET amplifiers, JFET switch, biasing in Ohmic region and 
active region, DMOSFET, depletion mode MOSFET, enhancement mode MOSFET, Digital 
switch, CMOS, E -MOSFET amplifiers, frequency response of amplifier, imp edance matching, 
Bode plots, frequency analysis of FET. (8 lectures) 
Differential amplifiers and Operational Amplifiers:  differential amplifier, DC -analysis, AC -
analysis, input characteristics of an Op Amp, common mode gain, loaded differential 
amplifier, the 741 Op Amp, Inverting Amplifier, Non -inverting Amplifier, two Op -Amp 
applications, negative feedback, VCVS voltage gain, ICVS amplifier, VCIS amplifier, ICIS 
amplifier, bandwidth. (8 lectures) 
Linear Op -Amp Circuit Applications: inverting amplifier cir cuits, non -inverting amplifier 
circuits, inverter/non -inverter circuits, differential amplifiers, summing amplifier circuits, 
voltage-controlled current source, automatic gain control, active filters, ideal responses, 
approximate responses, passive filters , first order stages, VCVS unity gain second order low 
pass filters, higher order filters, VCVS equal component low pass filters, Bandpass filters, 
Band stop Filters, All-pass filters. (6 lectures) 
Nonlinear Op Amp circuit: comparator with zero reference, comparator with non -zero 
references, comparator with hysteresis, integrator, waveform conversion, waveform 
generation, differentiator. (3 lectures) 
Oscillators: sinusoidal oscillation, Wein Bridge Oscillator, RC Oscillator, Colpitts Oscillators, LC 
oscillators, Quartz crystals, the 555 timer, astable operation of the 555 timer, 555 circuit 
applications, the phase locked loop. (3 lectures) 
Digital Principle and Digital Logic : logic gates, combinational logic circuits, SOP, POS 
representation, Karnaugh Map. (3 lectures) 
Data Processing Circuit : Multiplexers, demultiplexers, decoder, encoder, parity generator and 
checker, arithmetic circuits, adder, subtractors, clocks and timing circuits, 555 timer -
astable, monostable, flip -flops, RS, JK, D, edge triggering, registers, SISO, SIPO, PISO, 
PIPO, application of shift registers, counters, asynchronous counters, synchronous counter, 
modulus of a counter, counter design, design of synchronous and asynchronous sequential 
circuits. (11 lectures) 
Textbook  
1. Malvino, A., Bates, D., Electronic Principles, McGrawHill, 2016. 
2. Leach, D. P., Malvino, A. P. and Saha, G., Digital Principles and Applications, TMH, 2014. 
3. Horowitz, P. and Hill, W., The Art of Electronics, CUP, 2016. 
 
Self-Learning Materials 
1. Aggarwal, A., Circuits and Electronics, 2007, MIT Open Course Ware : 
http://ocw.mit.edu/6-002S07. 
 
Preparatory Course Materials 
1. Dube, D.C., Electronics, Department of Physics,  IIT Delhi: http://nptel.iitm.ac.in. 
 
  
Title Statistical Physics Number PHL6XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce various aspects of quantum statistics and its relevant applications in physics.  
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply the fundamental principles of statistical physics. 
Contents 
Thermodynamics: Basics, first and second laws; Maxwell‟s equation; extensive functions, 
Kinetic theory of gases. (5 Lecture) 
Conditions for phase equilibrium and stability: Multiphase equilibrium; stability. (6 Lecture) 
Statistical mechanics: Ensembles; non-interacting ideal systems. Partition function for various 
systems. (11 Lectures)  
Quantum statistics: Bose-Einstein and Fermi -Dirac distributions; black body radiation; Debye 
model specific heat, Bose-Einstein condensate. (8 Lectures) 
Statistical Mechanics for interact ing systems: Introduction, Ising Model, Neumann‟s Liquid 
crystals. (5 Lecture) 
Critical phenomena: Mean field theory; Landau's theory; Curie -Weiss theory; Renormalization 
group. (7 Lectures)  
Textbook 
1. Landau, L. D. and Lifshitz, E. M., Statistical Physics, Part 1, Pergamon Press, 1980. 
 Reference Books 
1. Chandler, D., Introduction to Modern Statistical Mechanics, Oxford University Press, 1987. 
2. Huang, K., Statistical Mechanics, John Wiley and Sons, 1987. 
Self-Learning Material  
1. NPTEL course material, Balakrish nan, V., Department of Physics, IIT Madras 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/122106027. 
 
 
 
 
 
Title Electrodynamics Number PHL6XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide the concepts regarding fields and forces in Electrodynamics and Magneto dynamics 
using basic scientific method. 
2. Basic understanding of relativistic electrodynamics and its applications in branches of 
Physical Sciences. 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Explain and solve problems based on classical electrodynamics using Maxwell‟s equation.  
2. To understand and proficiently carry out research by applying Classical relativistic 
electromagnetism using fundamental concepts of physical sciences. 
Contents  
Electrostatics, Magnetostatics and Electrodynamics : Gauss's law, Boundary value problems, 
multipoles, dielectrics, Biot and Savart law, Ampere‟s law, Faraday's law, Displacement 
current, Maxwell‟s equations, Wave propagation in Conductors and Dielectrics. (6 Lectures) 
Plane Electromagnetic Waves and Wave Propagation : Plane Waves in Non -conducting Medium 
Linear and Circular Polarization, Stokes Parameter, Reflection and Refraction of 
Electromagnetic Waves at a Plane Interface betw een Dielectrics, Fresnel Equation, Group 
Velocity Dispersion (GVD), Kramers-Kronig Relations.  (10 Lectures) 
Waveguides and Resonant Cavities: Fieldsat the surface of and within a Conductor; Cylindrical 
Cavities and Wave Guides, Resonant Cavities, Power lo sses in a Cavity and Q of a Cavity. (7 
Lectures) 
Simple Radiating Systems and Diffraction :  Fields of Radiation of localized oscillating Source, 
Electric Dipole fields and radiation and its application to radio waves. (6 Lectures)  
Radiation by moving Char ges: Lienard -Wiechertz Potentials and Fields for a Point Charge, 
Total power Radiated by an Accelerating charge, Larmor‟s formula. (5 Lectures) 
Special Theory of Relativity : Minkowski Space and Four vectors, Concepts of Four -velocity, 
Four Acceleration and  higher rank tensors, relativistic formation of electrodynamics, Action 
principle and Electromagnetic energy momentum Tensor. (8 Lectures) 
Textbook 
1. Jackson, J. D., Classical Electrodynamics, Wiley India Pvt. Ltd., 2007. 
Reference Books  
1. Lorrain, P.  and Corson, D., Electromagnetic Fields and Waves, CBS Publishers, 2003. 
2. Panofsky W.K.H. and Philips M., Classical Electricity and Magnetism , Dover Publishers, 
1990. 
Self-Learning course material 
1. Dighe, A., Electrodynamics, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research,  Mumbai, 
https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/115101004/. 
2. Gut, A., Lecture notes on Electromagnetism II , MIT open course ware 
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/physics/8-07-electromagnetism-ii-fall-2012/lecture-notes/. 
 
  
Title Condensed Matter Physics Number PHL6XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide the student with an extended knowledge of the principles and techniques of solid 
state physics. 
2. Provide an understanding of structure, thermal, electrical and magnetic properties of 
matter. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Formulate basic models for electrons and lattice vibrations for describing the physics of 
crystalline materials. 
2. Develop an understanding of the relation between band structure and the electrical/optical 
properties of a material. 
 
Contents  
Crystallography: Structural description of liquids and solids, External symmetry elements, 
Point groups, Direct periodic lattice, Basic concept of aperiodicity, Reciprocal lattice and 
diffraction conditions and its relation with Brillouin zones, Intensity of Bragg scattering from 
a unit cell and extinction conditions. (10 Lectures) 
Lattice Vibrations: Elastic waves, Enumeration of modes, Density of states of a continuous 
medium, Specific heat models of Einstein and Debye, Concept of phonon, Lattice waves, 
Lattice dynamics of crystals with up to two atoms per primitive basis, Density of states of a 
lattice, Thermal Conductivity, Scattering of X-rays, neutrons and light by phonons. (11 
Lectures) 
Electronic Properties of Solids: Electrons in periodic potential, Band Theory, Tight Binding, 
Cellular and Pseudo potential methods, Symmetry of energy bands, density of states, Fermi 
surface. (10 Lectures) 
Magnetism & Superconductivity: Introduction to types of magnetism, Curie-Weiss Law, 
Magnetic Domains & Hysteresis, Zero resistance, Meissner effect, Thermodynamics of the 
superconducting transition, Electrodynamics of superconductivity, BCS theory of 
superconductivity, Josephson effect. (11 Lectures) 
Textbook  
1. Kittel, C., Introduction to Solid State Physics, Wiley, 8th Edition, 2008. 
2. Ashcroft, N., W. and Mermin, N., D., Solid State Physics, Cengage Learning, 1976. 
3. Omar, M. A., Elementary Solid State Physics, Pearson, 2009. 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Rangarajan, G., Condensed Matter Physics, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Physics, 
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/115106061/. 
2. Wen, X-G., Physics of Solids I, MIT open course, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/physics/8-
231-physics-of-solids-i-fall-2006/     
Preparatory Course Material  
1. Simon, H., S. (2013), The Oxford Solid State Basics, Oxford University Press. 
 
 
 
  
Title Physics of Atoms and Molecules Number PHL6XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
1. To learn Atomic Physics with problem solving approach towards spectroscopy. 
Learning Outcomes 
1. The students will have an understanding of quantum behavior of atoms in external electric 
and magnetic fields. 
Course Content 
Hydrogen atom : Review of the Bohr atom model, solution of the Schrodinger equation, 
spectra of hydrogen and hydrogen -like atoms. Review of time -independent perturbation 
theory. Fine structure of the hydrogen atom: spin-orbit coupling and relativistic correction to 
the kinetic energy. Review of the Dirac equation. Dirac equation in the non -relativistic limit. 
Zeeman and Stark Spectroscopy Hyperfine interaction in atomic Hydrogen. Spec troscopy 
with the 21 cm emission line.  Review of time-dependent perturbation theory. (11 Lectures) 
Interaction of electromagnetic radiation with a two -level atom. Rabi flopping : The dipole 
approximation, electric dipole, magnetic dipole and electric quadr upole transitions. Selection 
rules. Transition probabilities and intensity of spectral lines. Line broadening mechanisms. 
Spontaneous and stimulated emissions and Einstein coefficients, masers and lasers. Lamb 
shift. Quantization of the electromagnetic fie ld. The Raman effect. Introduction to NMR and 
ESR. Review of Pauli's exclusion principle. The spin-statistics theorem. (11 Lectures) 
The Helium spectrum. Many electron   systems : Electron configurations and spectroscopic 
notation, equivalent and non -equivalent electrons and Hund's rules. Hartree -Fock SCF 
method, proof of Koopmans theorem, Slater's approximation to exchange. Total Hamiltonian 
of a molecule. Born -Oppenheimer approximation. Rotational and Vibrational Spectra of 
molecules. Anharmonicity, Franck-Condon principle, Electronic. Infrared and Raman Spectra 
analysis. (14 Lecture) 
Molecular Physics: Molecular Orbital and Electronic configuration of Diatomic molecules: H2, 
C2, O2, NO and CN; Vibrational structure and vibrational analysis, Dissociation Energy, 
Rotational Raman spectra and influence of nuclear spin (6 Lectures)  
Textbook  
1. Bransden, B.H. and Joachain, C.J., (2004), Physics of Atoms and Molecules, Prentice Hall, 
2nd Edition, Pearson Education, Delhi 
References 
1. Condon, E. U. and Shortley, G. H., (1951), The Theory of Atomic spectra, Cambridge 
University Press  
Online Course Material 
1. NPTEL course material  Prof. T. Kundu, IIT Mumbai  
https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/115101003/ 
Title Nuclear  and  Particle Physics Number PHL6XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide background to understand the role of nuclear physics in fundamental as well as 
applied aspects. 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Grasp the theoretical concepts of nuclear reactions and various nuclear models. 
2. Understand details of various applications of nuclear physics. 
 
Contents  
General properties of nuclei & Radioactive decay : Mass, radius, angular momentum, Magnetic 
dipole and electric quadrupole moment, Parity, Isospin, Radioactive disintegration and 
displacement law, α-particles, Geiger-Nuttall law, Quantum theory of α-decay, Continuous β-
spectrum, Neutrino hypothesis, Fermi theory of β -decay, Selection rules for β -decay, Parity 
violation in β-decays, Electric & magnetic multipole radiation. (8 Lectures) 
Nuclear Detectors and Accelerators: Interaction of charged particles and radiation with matter, 
Gaseous and Solid state detectors, Cyclic and Linear accelerators, Fixed target accelerat ors, 
Colliding beam machines. (5 Lectures) 
Nuclear forces: Deuteron problem, Low energy neutron -proton scattering, Spin dependence of 
neutron-proton interaction, Non -central force, Low energy proton -proton scattering, High -
energy neutron-proton & proton-proton scattering, Meson theory of nuclear force, Nature of 
two nucleon potential. (7 Lectures) 
Nuclear Models : Liquid drop model, Bether -Weizsacker formula, Nucleon mean potential, 
approximation by solvable potentials, Shell model, Collective model. (6 Lectures) 
Nuclear Reactions : Compound nucleus, Breit -Wigner formula, Evaporation model, Optical 
model, Heavy ion reaction, Phase transition and quark -gluon plasma; Nuclear fission, Bohr -
Wheeler theory, Fission reactors, Nuclear fusion and thermo -nuclear reacti on, Fusion 
reactors, Source of energy in stars, Solar neutrino problem, Nucleo-synthesis. (8 Lectures) 
Elementary Particles : Kinematics of high energy collisions, Pi mesons, Muons and their 
properties, Strange mesons, Hyperons, Resonance particles, Fundame ntal interactions in 
nature, Quark hypothesis of elementary particles, Classification of elementary particles, 
Conservation laws. (8 Lectures) 
Textbook 
1. Ghosal, S. N., Nuclear Physics, S. Chand, 2011. 
2. Burcham, W. E. and Jobes, M., Nuclear and Particle Physics, John Wiley & Sons Inc, 1995. 
 
Reference Books  
1. Cohen, B., Concepts of Nuclear Physics, McGraw Hill Education, 2017. 
2. Wong, S. M., Introductory Nuclear Physics, Prentice Hall India Learning Pvt. Ltd., 1996. 
 
Online Course Material  
1. Verma, H. C., Nuclear Physics: Fundamentals and Applications, IIT Kanpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/115104043/ 
 
 
 
  
Title Engineering Optics Number PHL6XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
1. This course provides comprehensive knowledge of optical science with elementary 
engineering applications. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. The students will become familiar with the concepts of optical sciences. 
2. Students will become familiar with working principles and applications of key optical 
components and devices.   
Contents  
Characteristics and Description of Light: Photons, Uncertainty principle for Photons, properties 
of light beam (1 lecture) 
Geometrical Optics: Ray characteristics, Ray matrices for optical components, Ray propagation 
through optical elements and Imaging (2 lectures)  
Wave Optics and applications:  plane waves of monochromatic light, temporal and spatial 
coherence, Interference, interferome ter and applications, Fresnel diffraction, Babinet‟s 
principle, Fraunhofer diffraction, limit of resolution, N -slit diffraction, spatial frequency 
filtering and applications (9 lectures) 
Polarization of Light and holography : Stokes parameters, Jones and Mu ller matrices, 
Applications, anisotropic media, liquid crystals, in-line and off-axis holography, holograms (9 
lectures) 
Integrated Optics : Different type of waveguides, pulse dispersion in waveguides, planar 
waveguides, strip waveguides, guided wave devices (6 lectures) 
Lasers and Nonlinear Optical Devices:  The laser principle, Three - and four level lasers, Q-
switching and mode locking, He -Ne laser, CO2 laser, Laser Applications, Physical origin of 
nonlinearity, Electro -Optic effect, Second Harmonic genera tion, Optical Rectification, Sum 
and Difference frequency generation, nonlinear pulse propagation and solitons (9 lectures)  
Optical instruments:  The Eye, basic Camera, Projection Systems, Microscope, Telescope and 
resolving power of optical instruments (6 lectures) 
Textbook  
1. Ghatak, A. K., and Thyagarajan, K., Optical Electronics, Cambridge University Press 2017 
2. Saleh, B. E. A. and Teich, M. C., Fundamentals of Photonics, Wiley, 2018 
3. Yariv, A., Quantum electronics, wiley, 1989 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Barbastathis, G. and Sheppard C., Optics, 
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/mechanical-engineering/2-71-optics-spring-2009/ 
Reference Course Material  
1. Ghatak, A., Optics, 2nd edition, Tata McGraw-Hill, 2000 
 
 
  
Title Computational Physics Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
1. To incorporate modern computational skills into the scientific problem solving paradigm.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. The successful students will become familiar with commonly used numerical techniques to 
solve problems in physics. 
 
Contents  
(Fractal 1) PHL7XX1 Numerical Methods-I [1-0-0] Solution of algebraic and transcendental 
equations: Iterative, bisection and Newton Raphson methods, Solution of simultaneous 
linear equations: Matrix inversion method (14 lectures) 
(Fractal 2) PHL7XX2 Numerical Methods -II [1-0-0] Interpolation: Newton an d Lagrange 
formulas, Numerical differentiation, Numerical Integration, Trapezoidal, Simpson and 
Gaussian quadrature methods, Least -square curve fitting, straight line and polynomial fits. 
(8 lectures) 
Numerical solution of ordinary differential equations : Euler and Runge -Kutta methods. (6 
lectures) 
(Fractal 3) PHL7XX3 S imulations: Numerical Methods  [1-0-0]Generation of uniformly 
distributed random integers, Statistical tests of randomness, Monte -Carlo evaluation of 
integrals and error analysis, Non -uniform probability distributions, Importance sampling, 
Rejection method, Metropolis algorithm, Molecular diffusion and Brownian motion as random 
walk problems and their Monte Carlo simulation. (8 lectures) 
Quantum Simulations : Time -independent Schrodinger equatio n in one dimension (radial or 
linear equations), Scattering from a spherical potential, Born Approximation, Bound State 
solutions. (6 lectures) 
 
The students will be assigned computer laboratory work based on the above syllabus.  
 
Textbook  
1. Koonin, S. E. and Meredith, D. C., Computational Physics, Addison-Wesley, 1990. 
2. Tao Pang, An Introduction to Computational Physics, Cambridge Univ. Press, 1997. 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/115104095/ 
2. https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/115106060/ 
 
Reference Course Material  
1. Landau, R. H. and Mejia, M. J. P., Computational Physics, John Wiley, 1997.  
2. Thijssen, J. M., Computational Physics, Cambridge Univ. Press, 1999. 
 
 
 
  
Title  High Energy Physics Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide background to understand the concepts of particle physics.  
2. Acquaint with techniques used in recent neutrino telescopes. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand concepts of Feynman calculus, details of QED and weak interactions. 
2. Learn results and future prospects associated with recent neutrino observatories. 
 
Contents 
Quantum field theory (QFT): Classical field theory: Lagrangian and Hamiltonian formalisms; 
Noether‟s theorem. This introduces the concept of sy mmetries in a consistent fashion. Need 
for quantum field theory: particles and fields, Charge conjugation and C Parity, Interaction 
of a spin-0 particle with an electromagnetic field.  (5 Lectures) 
Klein Gordon Equation: KG equation, The non -relativistic l imit, Free spin -0 particles, The 
charged KG field, Lagrange density and energy -momentum tensor of the KG -field, Lorentz 
Invariance of the KG equation.  (6 Lectures) 
Gauge invariance of the couplings, Lagrange density and energy -momentum tensor for a KG 
particle in an electromagnetic field, Negative Energy Solutions, Antiparticles, Gamma -
matrices and their properties, Covariance of Dirac equation, Charge conjugation, Parity & 
Time reversal invariance, Plane wave solution, Two component theory of neutrino, Sp in and 
Helicity. (6 Lectures) 
Quantum Electrodynamics (QED):  Feynman rules for QED, Electron -Muon scattering, Electron-
Electron scattering, Compton scattering, Casimir‟s trick, Mott and Rutherford scattering, Pair 
annihilation. (9 Lectures) 
Weak Interactions: Parity violation and the V -A form of the weak interaction, interpretation of 
the coupling G, Nuclear β -decay, Muon and pion decay, Charged current neutrino -electron 
scattering, neutrino quark scattering, Observation of weak neutral current, Neutral cur rent 
neutrino-quark scattering, Cabibbo angle. (10 Lectures) 
Neutrino Telescope: Interaction of Ultra -High Energy (UHE) neutrinos with cosmic microwave 
background, Askaryan effect, Relic neutrinos, Cherenkov based neutrino detectors, Antarctic 
Impulsive Tr ansient Antenna (ANITA) experiment, Antarctic Muon and Neutrino Detector 
Array (AMANDA) and Ice Cube experiments, ANTARES telescope, Next generation neutrino 
telescopes. (6 Lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. Griffiths, D., Introduction to Elementary Particles, Wiley-Vch 2010. 
2. Giunti, C. and Kim, C.W., Fundamentals of neutrino physics and Astrophysics , Oxford 
University Press; 1st edition 2007.   
 
Self-Learning Material 
1. Guth A., Lecture Notes MIT Course No. 8.323, Relativistic Quantum Field Theory I , Spring 
Sem., 2008. 
 
Preparatory Course Material  
1. Sakurai,J.J., Advanced Quantum Mechanics, Addison-Wesley 1967. 
 
 
  
Title  Introduction to Space Science Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [2] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide introduction to space science. 
2. Provide introduction of cosmology 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Grasp different physical aspects of space science. 
 
Contents ((i) Introduction to Astronomy, (ii) General theory of relativity andCosmology) 
 
PHL7XX1 (Introduction to Astronomy) [1-0-0] 
Basic observation of space: Celestial coordinates, brightness, absolute and relative magnitude, 
sources of astronomical information, astronomy in different bands of electromagnetic radiation. 
(4 Lectures) 
X-ray Astronomy: X-ray emissions- Thermal, non-thermal: Bremsstrahlung, Synchrotron, X-
ray satellite detectors. Properties of stars: Colour and surface temperature, stellar spectra, the 
Hertzsprung-Russel diagram, size, mass and temperature of stars.  Celestial objects: The Sun, 
Neutron stars, classification of Galaxies, Exotic matter in space: dark matter. (10 Lectures)  
 
PHL7XX2 (General Theory of Relativity and Cosmology) [2-0-0] 
General theory of relativity: Principle of equivalence–gravitational forces–geodesic–Tensor 
algebra–tensor density–Killing vectors and symmetries Einstein's field equation. (8 lectures) 
 
Schwarzschild solution–Birkhoff's theorem - geodesic equation in Schwarzschild space time–
Precession of perihelion of mercury - gravitational frequency shift - Shapiro delay. (4 lectures) 
 
Cosmology: Olber's paradox: Why is the sky dark at night?, Expanding universe and Hubble's 
law, Finiteness and infiniteness of the universe. Evolutionary view of the Universe:  The paradox 
of thermal death, Thermodynamics of the expanding universe (Radiation under adiabatic 
expansion, Particles under adiabatic expansion), the negative thermal capacity of the solar 
system, structure formation. (10 Lectures) 
Thermal history of the universe:  Cosmic microwave background. Cosmological Models: 
Friedmann-Robertson Walker equation, Open, flat and closed universe, dark energy. (6 
Lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. Narlikar, J. V., An introduction to cosmology, Cambridge University Press 2002. 
2. Carroll, S. M., Spacetime and Geometry, Pearson India Education Services 2018. 
3. M.Longair, High Energy Astrophysics vol 1, Cambridge University Press. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
1. Bertschinger E. & Taylor E. F., Lecture Notes MIT Course No. 8.224, General Relativity and 
Astrophysics, Spring Sem., 2003. 
2. Rappaport, S. A., and  Elliot, J., Introduction to Astronomy, 
https://dspace.mit.edu/handle/1721.1/34941 
 
Preparatory Course Material  
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/115105046/. 
 
 
  
Title Nanoscience and Nanotechnology Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce physics of low dimensional objects and discuss changes in mechanical, electronic, 
magnetic and optical properties at reduced dimensions. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Obtain a flavor of nanoscience and nanotechnology and develop insight into the physical 
concepts behind nano-scale phenomena. 
2. Understand few nano-structures for practical device applications will also be discussed. 
 
Contents  
PHL7XX1 (Basics of Nanomaterials, Nanoparticles and Clusters) [1-0-0] 
(a) Quantum Confinement and definition of Nano: Electron states, energy bands and density of      
states for quantum Systems; Heterojunctions, Type I and Type II Heterostructures, Quantum  
wells, Quantum wires and Quantum dots, Effective Mass. (5 lectures)  
(b) Nanoparticles and Clusters: Metal nanoclusters, Magic numbers, Geometric structures,  
Electronic structures, Magnetic and semiconducting clusters and nanoparticles, Rare gas and  
molecular clusters, Carbon nanostructures, 2-D materials. (9 lectures) 
 
PHL7XX2 (Nanotechnology for Energy) [1-0-0] 
(a) Energy generation/storage: Dye sensitized solar cells, Quantum Dot sensitized solar cell,  
electrode materials for rechargeable batteries, supercapacitors, fuel cells, Hydrogen storage in  
carbon nanomaterials, nanocatalyst. (10 lectures) 
(b) Nanotechnology in data storage: Magnetic hard disk drive, Magnetic read and write head,  
Flash memory, Solid state drive, Future of data storage. (4 lectures) 
 
PHL7XX3 (Nanotechnology for Water and Healthcare) [1-0-0] 
(a) Nanotechnology in Water/Air purification: Nanomaterials for water and air purification,  
Water desalination using carbon nanomaterials. (8 lectures) 
(b) Nanotechnology in healthcare: Diagnostics using nanomaterials, i.e., biosensors, drug 
delivery using magnetic nanoparticles, magnetic hyperthermia for cancer treatment. (6 
lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Poole C.P. Jr. and Owens F.J., Introduction to nanotechnology, Wiley-Interscience, 2003 
2. Shong C.W., Haur S.C. and Wee A. T. S., Science at the nanoscale, CRC Press, 2009 
3. Davis J.H., The physics of low-dimensional semiconductors, Cambridge Uni Press, 2012 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Quereshi, M., Department of Chemistry, IIT Guwahati, 
https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/104103019/. 
2. Online review papers in various journals. 
 
Preparatory Course Material  
1. Balani, K. and Subramaniam, A., Department of Material Science and Engineering, IIT 
Kanpur, NPTEL Course: https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/118104008/. 
 
 
 
  
Title Advanced Condensed Matter Physics Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide training and knowledge to condensed matter physics of complex systems including 
both fundamental as well as applied aspects. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. The students are expected to have the ability to understand magnetism, ferroelectricity, 
opto-electronic properties and basics of soft condensed matter physics. 
 
Contents  
Magnetism and Ferroelectricity:  Dia/para magnetism, ferro, ferri/anti -ferro magnetism, 
superpara/superferro magnetism, magnetic domains, domain dynamics, introduction to 
magnetic resonance.Dielectric constant and polarizability, phase transition, ferroelectric 
crystals classification, d isplacive transitions, Landau theory of phase transition, first and 
second order transition, antiferroelectricity, ferroelectric domains and imaging. (11 lectures) 
Optical properties and plasmons:  Electron gas, dielectric function of electron, dispersion 
relation, plasmon, electrostatic screening, polaritons, Electron -electron and electron-phonon 
interaction, Kramer-Kroning relation, excitons, Raman effect. (10 lectures)  
Defects and Interfaces:  Surface crystallography, Surface electronic structure, 
magnetoresistance, Heterostructures, point defects, dislocations, Burger vectors, dislocation 
and crystal growth. (10 lectures) 
Soft Matter: Time and length scales, Colloids, polymers, liquid crystals and ionic soft matter, 
phase transition in soft matter systems. (11 lectures) 
 
Textbook 
1. Kittel C, Solid State Physics, Wiley, 2004. 
2. Ashcroft N. W., Mermin N. D., Solid State Physics, Saunders, 1976. 
3. R. A. L. Jones, Soft condensed matter, Oxford University Press 2002. 
 
Reference Books  
1. Sander M. Leonard, Advanced Condensed Matter Physics, Cambridge Univ. Press, 2009. 
2. Snoke W. David, Solid State Physics: Essential Concepts, Pearson, 2009. 
3. M. Doi, Soft matter physics, Oxford University Press, 2014. 
 
Online Course Material  
1. Rangarajan, G., Condensed Matter Physics, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Physics, 
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/115106061/. 
2. Wen, X. G., Physics of Solids I, MIT open course, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/physics/8-
231-physics-of-solids-i-fall-2006/  
 
 
  
Title Introduction to Material Characterization Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide an introduction to various characterization techniques for materials and devices  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Obtain basic idea of various techniques used to determine structural, compositional, and 
functional properties such as electrical, magnetic and optical properties of materials  
2. Appreciate the distinction between diffraction, imaging and spectroscopic based  techniques 
for material characterization 
 
Contents  
PHL7XX1 (Material Characterization by Diffraction and Electron Microscopy) [1 -0-0] 
(a) Introduction and Necessity of Material Characterization: Structural and functional 
properties  
of materials (2 lectures) 
(b) Diffraction based Characterization: Structure of crystalline and non-crystalline materials by  
x-ray diffraction, indexing of lattice planes and lattice parameter determination, electron and  
neutron diffraction, small angle scattering (9 lectures) 
(c) Introduction to Electron Microscopy: Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM). (3 lectures)  
 
PHL7XX2 (Characterization of Materials by Microscopy and Spectroscopy) [1-0-0] 
(a) Optical microscopy, Polarization Microscopy, Fluorescence Microscopy, Phase contrast  
Microscopy, Scanning Tunneling Microscopy (STM) and Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM)  
(b) Spectroscopic based Characterization:UV-Vis-NIR, FTIR, Photoluminescence (14 lectures) 
 
PHL7XX3(Functional Properties of Materials) [1-0-0] 
(a) Electrical properties: Resistivity (Four probe and Van der Pauw method), 
Magnetoresistance  
and Hall effect. (5 lectures) 
(b) Magnetic properties: Magnetization and magnetic moment, Measurement of 
Magnetization  
by force and by induction, Magnetic Hysteresis, Magnetic susceptibility, Principles of Electron  
Paramagnetic Resonance and Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR).(9 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Zhang, S., Li, L. and Kumar, A., Materials Characterization Techniques, CRC Press, 2008 
2. Mertz, J., Introduction to Optical Microscopy, 2nd Edition, Cambridge University Press, 2019 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Shankaran, S., Materials Characteri zation, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Metallurgical & Materials Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113106034/. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Title Magnetism and Superconductivity Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce magnetism and superconductivity principles and their applications 
2. Impart advanced concepts of magnetic materials in modern research 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand atomic origin of spin and magnetism and get insight into manifestation 
of quantum mechanics at macro level.  
2. Grasp in-depth knowledge of magnetism and its modern application   
 
Contents  
Brief introduction: Magnetic moment, magnetic dipole, Magnetization and angular momentum 
(2 lectures) 
Isolated magnetic moment: Atom in a magnetic field, Susceptibility, Diamagnetism, 
Paramagnetism, Semiclassical treatment of paramagnetism, Langevin and Brillouin Theory  
Ground state of ion and Hund‟s rule, spin-orbit coupling L-S and j-j coupling, Adiabatic 
Demagnetization (8 lectures) 
Magnetic interactions: Dipole-dipole, Exchange, Origin of exchange, direct, indirect and 
anisotropic exchange (4 lectures) 
Magnetic Order: Ferromagnetism, Weiss model, Antiferromagnetism, Weiss model of 
antiferromagnetism, Ferrimagnetism, Helical order, Spin glass (5 lectures) 
Concept of broken order and symmetry, Landau theory of ferromagnetism, Phase transition, 
Magnons, Spin waves (4 lectures)  
Magnetic domains, domain walls, Anisotropy, Domain observation and Hysteresis (5 lectures)  
Band Magnetism: Free electron model, Pauli paramagnetism, Stoner criterion, Landau levels, 
Landau diamagnetism (5 lectures) 
Device applications: Magnetic data storage, magneto-optic effect, magnetic semiconductors, 
Giant Magneto Resistance, Spintronics devices (4 lectures) 
Superconductivity and related effects, superconducting materials and their applications, 
Josephson junction and SQUID (5 lectures) 
 
 
Textbook  
1. Culity B. D. and Graham, C. D., Introduction to magnetic materials, Addison-Wesley, 1972 
2. Blundell, S., Magnetism in Condensed Matter, Oxford University Press, 2001 
3. Annett, J. F., Superconductivity, Superfluids and Condensates, Oxford University Press, 2004  
 
Self Learning Material  
1. O‟Handley, R., Magnetic Materials , MIT Open Course -Materials Science and Engineering, 
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/materials-science-and-engineering/3-45-magnetic-materials-
spring-2004/index.htm 
 
 
 
  
Title Introduction to Medical Physics Number PH7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The instructor will 
1. Introduce physics concepts and principles relevant for medicine and health  
2. Provide the introduction of modern diagnostic tools and various technology to medical 
research and to the healthcare arena in general that is set to revolutionize the way we cure 
diseases. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to get an insight into: 
1. Aspects of physics with engineering for biological applications  
2. Contribution of physics in the development of medical diagnostics  
 
Contents  
PH7XX1 (Radiological imaging techniques) [1-0-0] 
(a) Physics in Medical research: Interaction of radiation with matter, Interaction of photons  
with tissues, molecules, cells and organs, Elastic and inelastic scattering, Thomson and  
Compton Scattering. (6 lectures) 
(b) Radiological imaging: X-ray imaging and computerized Tomography (CT), Radioisotope  
imaging, Positron–emission Tomography, Introduction to the image analysis. (8 lectures) 
PH7XX2 (Non-radiological imaging techniques) [1-0-0] 
(a) Non -radiological imaging: Polarization Microscopy, Confocal Microscopy, Fluorescence 
Microscopy and Phase Contrast Microscopy, Breaking the diffraction limit in microscopy, 
Scanning near-field optical microscopy (SNOM), Principles of Nuclear Magnetic resonance and 
Magnetic Resonance Imaging, functional MRI. (14 lectures) 
PH7XX3 (Physics in Therapeutics) [1-0-0] 
(a) Plasma for Medicine: Introduction of low temperature plasma technology to medical  
research, plasma chemistry, fundamentals of non-equilibrium plasmas and cell biology. Cold  
plasma applications in the inactivation of pathogens, anti-bacterial coatings, wound healing,  
electrosurgery, cancer treatment and dentistry. (10 lectures) 
(b) Nuclear Medicine: Radioactivity, Production of radionuclides, Radiation therapy for 
cancer  
treatment. (4 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Cho, Z -H., Jones, J. and Singh, M.,  Foundations of Medical Imaging, 1st EditionWiley 
Interscience, 1993 
2. Pryma, D. A., Nuclear Medicine, 1st Edition, Oxford University Press, 2015 
3. Murphy, D. B. and Davidson, M. W., Fundamental of Light Microscopy and Electronic 
Imaging, 2nd Edition, Wiley-Blackwell, 2012 
 
Reference Books 
1. Toyokuni, S., Ikehara, Y., Kikkawa, F. and Hori, M. (2018), Plasma Medical Science , 1 st 
Edition, Academic Press. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
1. Department of Electrical Engg, IIT Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108105091/  
2. Jasanoff, A., MIT Open courseware, Noninvasive Imaging in Biology and Medicine,  
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/nuclear-engineering/22-56j-noninvasive-imaging-in-biology-
and  
medicine-fall-2005/index.htm. 
 
Preparatory Course Material  
1. Department of Physics, IIT Delhi, https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/115102017/. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Title Electronic Transport in Mesoscopic 
Systems 
Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
To understand the electronic transport mechanism in mesoscopic systems. 
Learning Outcomes 
Nanodevice fabrication will be much easier than before. 
Contents 
An atomistic view of electrical resistance : Energy level diagram, what makes electrons flow, 
the quantum of conductance, potential profile, Coulomb blockade, towar ds Ohm‟s law. (8 
lectures) 
Schrodinger equation and Self-consistent field: Hydrogen atom, Method of finite differences, 
the self -consistent field procedure, relation to the multi -electron picture, bonding, multi -
electron picture, basis functions as a compu tational tool, basis function as a conceptual tool, 
equilibrium density matrix. (10 lectures) 
Band Structure:Examples of 1D and 2D solids, common semiconductors, effect of spin -orbit 
coupling, Quantum wells, wires, dots, and nanotubes, density of states, m inimum resistance 
of a wire, velocity of a sub-band electron. (10 lectures) 
Capacitance and Level broadening: Model Hamiltonian, electron density/density matrix, 
quantum vs electrostatic capacitance, open systems, local density of states, lifetime, what 
constitutes a contact? (5 lectures) 
Coherent and Non -coherent transport: Density matrix, inflow/outflow, transmission, 
overview of non -coherent transport, why does an atom emit light? Inflow/outflow, some 
ideas on phonons, atoms to transistor, quantum transport equations, physics of Ohm‟s law, 
where is the heat dissipated? Where is the voltage drop? (9 lectures) 
 Textbook 
1.Datta, S., Quantum transport: atoms to transistor, 2011, 2nd ed. Cambridge University 
Reference Books 
2.Zwanzig, R., Non-equilibrium statistical mechanics, Oxford University Press 
Online Course Material 
1. Datta, S., Fundamentals to Nanoelectronics:https://nanohub.org/courses/fon1 
  
Title Physics of Solar Cells Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Make the students understand the physical principle behind different types of solar cells. 
2. Make the students understand the role of quality of light, types of materials, and device 
fabrication techniques. 
3. Make the students understand the inexpensive ways to fabricate the solar cells. 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Fabricate unconventional solar cells. 
2. Increase the efficiency of the solar cells by applying the theoretical knowledge. 
Contents 
Basic Concepts of Solar Cell: PV cells and modules, photocur rent and quantum efficiency, 
open circuit voltage, short circuit current, parasitic resistance (3 lectures) 
Role of light:  Solar resources, Equilibrium condition under illumination, available work, 
photocurrent, dark current.  (4 lectures) 
Properties of se miconductor: bands in crystals, density of states, electron distribution 
function, electron and hole densities, impurities and doping, drift current, diffusion 
current. (8 lectures) 
Generation and Recombination: semiconductor transport equations, generatio n and 
recombination, photogeneration, types of recombination. (5 lectures) 
Junction: Origin of photovoltaic action, metal semiconductor junction, ohmic contacts, p -n 
junction, p-i-n junction, p-n heterojunction, junctions in organic materials. (6 lectures) 
Analysis of p -n junction : formation of p -n junction, calculation of depletion width, 
calculation of carrier and current densities, p -n junction in dark, p -n junction under 
illumination, p-n junction as a photovoltaic cell. (8 lectures) 
Monocrystalline Sol ar Cells : Materials and Design, silicon material properties, band 
structure and optical absorption, doping, recombination and carrier transport. (3 
lectures) 
Thin film solar cells : Materials, amorphous silicon, defects in amorphous material, 
absorption, doping, stability, design of the solar cell. (3 lectures) 
Strategies for high efficiency : multiple band gap, tandem cells, principles of cooling and 
hot carrier solar cell, impact ionization solar cells. (2 lectures) 
 
Textbook 
1.  J., Nelson, The Physics of Solar Cells, Imperial College Press, (2003),. 
 Reference Books 
1. P.,Wurfel, U., Wurfel, (2016), Physics of Solar Cell, Willey VCH. 
2. S.,Fonash, (2010), Solar Cell Device Physics, Academic Press. 
Online Course Material 
1. Buonassisi, T., Fundamentals of Phot ovoltaics, 2011, MIT OpenCourseWare 
:http://ocw.mit.edu/2-627F11 
 
 
  
Title Fundamentals of Plasma and Fusion Science Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. present the fundamental principles of basic plasma and plasma behavior by pointing out 
specific plasma properties useful in technological applications.  
2. Also, provide an overview of fusion plasma science and its consequences in the 21 st century 
for the benefit of mankind. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the important scientific and technical terms of plasma.  
2. Use mathematical knowledge in the solution of plasma physics problems. 
3. Recognize the importance of plasma based controlled thermonuclear fusion. 
 
Course Content 
Introduction of plasma -Plasmas in nature and applications, Relevant concepts from gas 
(kinetic) theory, Debye Shielding, Definition of plasma and relevant characteristic 
parameters, Collision rates and mean-free paths. (6 Lectures) 
Single particle motions -Charged particle motion in uniform electromagnetic field, Charged 
particle motion in non -uniform magnetostatic field, Charged particle motion in time varying 
electromagnetic fields, Adiabatic invariants. (4 Lectures) 
Plasma fluid theory-Continuity equations, Convective derivative, Equations of state, Single fluid 
approximation, MHD, MHD equilibria, Generalised Ohm‟s Law. (8 Lectures) 
Waves and instabilities in plasmas -Cold plasma waves, Thermal  effects on plasma waves, 
Electron plasma waves, Electromagnetic waves in plasma, Equilibrium and stability, Two -
stream instability. (8 Lectures)  
Plasma generation and properties - Concepts of plasma generation in laboratory, Plasma 
sheath, Particle and energy balance, Scaling laws. (8 Lectures) 
Concept of Fusion Plasma Science -Thermonuclear fusion burn basics,Fusion Reaction, 
Thermonuclear fusion, Power balance, Ignition, Tokamaks, Fuel resources, Tokamak 
economics. (8 Lectures)  
 
Text Books  
1. F.F. Chen, Introduction to Plasma Physics and Controlled Fusion, Volume 1: Plasma 
Physics, NY, Plenum Press, 1984. 
2. John Wesson, Tokamaks, Clarendon Press- Oxford, 2004. 
 
Reference Books 
1. R.J Goldston and Paul H. Rutherford, Introduction to Plasma Physics, Institute of Physics 
Publishing, Bristol 1995. 
2. R. Dendy, Plasma Physics: An Introductory Course, Cambridge, Cambridge University 
Press, 1993. 
 
Online course material 
1. Tripathi, V.K.,Plasma Physics: Fundamentals and Applications , NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/115102020/. 
 
 
 
  
Title Introduction to Quantum Technologies Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide various facets of frontiers of quantum technological domains and its understanding 
from the beginner‟s perspective. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. In understanding fundamental principles of quantum state engineering. 
2. Apply modern quantum state engineered tools in advanced domain of physics 
 
Contents  
Non-classical States Generation : Generation of Single Photon, Heralded Photon and Photon 
added/subtracted states, NOON State. (6 Lectures)  
Random Number Generation (RNG) : True RNG Generation, Validation and relevant 
experimental details. (6 Lecture) 
Photon Statistics : Detailed analysis  of Photon Statistics and higher -order moments for non -
classical states and quantum Metrology. (6 Lecture) 
Quantum State Engineering and tomography : Methods to generate engineered quantum states 
and its applications, Quantum State Tomography (QST). (6 Lectures)  
Quantum Cryptography: Introduction to Quantum Cryptography. (6 Lectures) 
Quantum Computation: Physical realization of quantum computers, and algorithms, qubits 
using photons and superconducting quits, modern quantum algorithms.  (6 Lectures) 
Open Qu antum Systems : Introduction to Open quantum system and its Technological 
Implementation. (6 Lecture) 
Textbooks 
1. Agarwal, G. S., Quantum Optics, Cambridge University Press, 2012.  
2. Banerjee, S., Open Quantum Systems: Dynamics of Nonclassical Evolution, Springer and 
Hindustan Book Agency, 2018. 
Reference Books 
1. Evans, M. W., Luks, A., Perina, Jan., Phase in Optics, World Scientific Publishing Company, 
1997. 
Self-Learning Material   
1. Prof Dipan Ghosh, Quantum Information and Computing Indian Institute of Technology 
Bombay, https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/115101092/. 
 
Title Laser Technologies Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
1. This course aims to provide the student with a basic understanding of Lasers and an 
extended knowledge of the Laser-based technologies. 
Learning Outcomes 
2. The course provides students with knowledge of laser physics and introduces them to 
nonlinear optics, laser interferometer, and spectroscopy applications. Also, it provides a 
good understanding of the critical laser parameters important for their use in various real -
world app lications such as: quantum optics, quantum technologies, telecommunications, 
industrial material processing, sensing, bio -medicine, imaging, ranging and automobile 
industry. 
Course Contents  
Fundamentals of Lasers: Absorption, Spontaneous emission and Stim ulated emission, Einstein 
coefficients and their significance,Lasing mechanisms, Laser oscillator, Laser characteristics, 
Principles for operation of Lasers, modes and mode selection, Temporal & Spatial 
Coherence, comparison of laser with conventional sour ces of light, Laser Line width and Line 
broadening mechanisms, Gaussian Beams and optical resonators. (7 lectures) 
Types of Lasers:  rate equations, CW lasers, and Pulsed Lasers , Gas lasers, solid state lasers, 
semiconductor lasers, Dye Lasers and Fiber las ers, Spectral coverage with current Laser 
technologies. (7 lectures) 
Generation of short and Ultrashort pulses:  Q-Switching, Mode locking, Chirping and Pulse 
compression, YAG Lasers, State -of–art-lasers (Ti: Sapphire Lasers and Fiber Lasers). (7 
lectures) 
Nonlinear Optics:  Second and Third order nonlinear susceptibilities and nonlinear optical 
phenomena, Self -phase modulation in fibers, broadband and supercontinuum sources. (6 
lectures) 
Laser Interferometry:  Michelson & Mach -Zehnder Interferometer, Sagnac Interferometer, 
HOM interferometer, Shearing Interferometer, and its connection to spatial Coherence, 
Fabry-Perot interferometer, LIGO, applications. (7 lectures) 
Laser Spectroscopy: Four -wave mixing, Terahertz generation (Optical rectification in a 
nonlinear medium), Transient absorption/reflection spectrometer. (8 lectures) 
Text Books   
1. Sigman, A., Lasers, Mill Valley, Calif. University Science Books, 1986 
2. Rulliere, C., FemtosecondLaserPulses, Springer, 2003. 
3. Yariv A & Pochi, Y., Photonics, Oxford University Press, 2006. 
Reference books  
1. Shen. Y. R., The Principles of Nonlinear Optics, Wiley-Interscience, 2002. 
2. Dexheimer. S. L., Terahertz Spectroscopy, CRC Press, 2008. 
Self-Learning course material 
1. Unique properties of lasers and their applications, Manabendra Chandra, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/104104085/. 
Preparatory course material 
1. Understanding Lasers and Fiber Optics, Prof. Shaoul Ezekiel 
https://ocw.mit.edu/resources/res-6-005-understanding-lasers-and-fiberoptics-spring-
2008/. 
 
 
  
Title Computational Materials Science Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Help in understanding the physical properties of materials. 
2. Help in implementing the theoretical concepts to compute materials properties. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Learn theoretical concepts of different computational techniques in materials science. 
2. Simulate and compute material properties using density functional theory, molecular 
dynamics and Monte Carlo methods. 
 
Contents 
(Fractal 1) PHL7XX1 Basic concepts in Density Functional Theory (DFT) (1-0-0) 
Uniform electron gas, Thomas -Fermi model, The Hohenberg -Kohn theorems, formulation of 
DFT, Kohn -Sham variational principle, Local/spin density approximation (LDA/LSDA), 
Generalized-gradient approximations (GGAs), Orbital dependent functional, Hybrid 
functionals, Introduction to Quantum Espresso. (14 lectures) 
(Fractal 2) PHL7XX2 Molecular dynamics Simulations (1-0-0) 
Equations of motion, integrators, Interaction potential models, Force calculations, Long -
range corrections, Molecular dynamics in various ensembles, Advanced MD techniques, 
Linear response theory and Introduction to LAMMPS & GROMACS. (14 lectures) 
(Fractal 3) PHL7XX3 Monte Carlo Simulations (1-0-0) 
Monte Carlo integration, Importance sampling, Metropolis algorithm, Detailed balance, Free 
energy calculations, Widom insertion and Grand canonical Monte Carlo. (14 lectures)  
 
Textbook 
1. Sholl, D, and Steckel, J. A., Density Functional Theory: A Practical Introduction, Wiley-
Interscience 2009. 
2. Frenkel, D, and Smit, B., Understanding Molecular Simulation: From algorithms to 
applications, Academic Press 2001. 
3. Landau, D. P. and Binder, K., A Guide to Monte Carlo Simulations in Statistical Physics, 
3rd Edition, Cambridge University Press 2009. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Martin, R. M., Electronic Structure Basic Theory and Practical Methods, Cambridge 
University Press 2004. 
2. Allen, M. P., and Tildesley, D. J., Computer Simulation of Liquids, Oxford University 
Press, 2nd ed. 2017. 
  
Online Course Material 
1. MIT Open Course Ware, 3.320 “Atomistic Computer Modeling of Materials (SMA 5107)”, by 
Ceder, G. and Marzari, N.; Spring 2005, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/materials-science-
and-engineering/3-320-atomistic-computer-modeling-of-materials-sma-5107-spring-2005/ 
2. NPTEL course by Prof. Tembe, B. L., Department of Chemistry, IIT Bombay; 
“Computational Chemistry and Class Molecular Dynamics”; 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/104101095/. 
3. LAMMPS MD simulation package https://lammps.sandia.gov/index.html. 
  
Title Soft Matter Physics Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
1. To understand theoretical concepts in soft matter physics. 
2. To understand the structural and thermodynamic properties of soft matter materials. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Ability to apply statistical physics concepts to soft matter. 
2. Ability to appreciate the role of self-assembly, liquid crystals, macromolecular solutions 
in technological applications. 
 
Contents 
(Fractal 1) PHL7XX1 Fundamentals of Soft Matter Physics (1-0-0) 
What is soft matter?; time, length and energy scales; intermolecular forces; 
macromolecules; biopolymers; colloids, liquid crystals, membranes and self -assembly; (14 
lectures) 
(Fractal 2) PHL7XX2 Theory of Simple Liquids (1-0-0) 
Densities and distribution functions; energy, pressure and compressibility, YBG hierarchy, 
virial expansion, hard -sphere equation of state and numerical calculation of Lennard -Jones 
systems (14 lectures) 
(Fractal 3) PHL7XX3 Polymer Physics (1-0-0) 
Random walks, model systems, distribution functions, chain statistics, coil -globule 
transition, polymer solutions, flexibility and semi -flexibility, self -avoidance, entanglement, 
viscoelasticity, reptation and Rouse models. (14 lectures) 
Textbook 
1. Doi, M., Soft Matter Physics, Oxford University Press 2014. 
2. Jones, R. A. L., Soft Condensed Matter, Oxford University Press 2002. 
Reference Books 
1. Chaikin, P. M., and Lubensky, T. C., Principles of Condensed Matter Physics, Cambridge 
University Press 
  
Online Course Material 
1. NPTEL course by Profs. Sunil Kumar, P. B., and Menon, G. I.,; “Physics of Soft 
Condensed Matter”; https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/115106063/ 
 
  
Title Statistical Methods for Data Analysis Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives: 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide knowledge on commonly used statistical methods in analyzing physics data. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to, 
1. Understand statistical methods in analyzing physical data. 
 
Contents 
Basic Statistics and Common Probability Distributions:  Probability, Random variables, discrete 
andcontinuous probability distributions, cumulative distributions. Mean, variance and 
covariance. Central Limit Theorem. Method of moments. Monte Carlo Methods: 
transformation of PDFs, acceptance-rejection technique. (8 Lectures) 
Bayesian Statistics: Likelihoods, priors and posteriors. Nuisance parameters, systematics 
uncertainties,and marginatization. (8 Lectures) 
Random and Systematic Uncertainties: Error bars and error propagation. Correlation and „error 
matrix‟. Non-Gaussian uncertainties. Techniques for managing systematic uncertainties. 
(8 Lectures) 
Parameter Estimation: Least square regression. Minimization techniques. “Robust” alternatives 
to theleast square method. (8 Lectures) 
Statistical Tests: Hypotheses, test statistics, significance level, power, Neyman -Pearson test, 
statistical trials, likelihood ratio tests, Goodness -of-fit tests. Bayesian approach: posterior 
odds, the Bayes Factor, the Ockham Factor. Method of maximum likelihood. Statistical 
errors, confidence intervals and limits. (10 Lectures) 
 The students will be assigned computer laboratory work based on the above syllabus.  
Textbooks 
1. Louis, L., Statistics for nuclear and particle physics, Addison-Wesley, 1990. 
2. Cowan, G., Statistical Data Analysis, Oxford University Press, 1998. 
 
Self-Learning Material: 
1. Sivia, D. S. and Skilling J., Data Analysis A Bayesian Tutorial , Oxford University Press, 
2nd edition, 2006. 
2. Martin, B. R., Statistics for Physical Science: An Introduction , Academic Press, 1 st edition, 
2012. 
Preparatory Course Material: 
1. http://www-library.desy.de/preparch/books/vstatmp_engl.pdf 
 
 
 
 
  
Title Optical Fiber Technology Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
1. To understand and gather knowledge on guided wave optics namely fiber optics and its 
applications. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. The students will become familiar with the concepts of modes, propagations of optical 
pulses, and nonlinear aspect of light matter interaction inside fibers. 
2. Students will become familiar with fiber characterization/measurement techniques and 
state-of-the-art applications.   
Contents  
(Fractal 1) PHL7XX1 Introduction to Optical Fiber [1 -0-0] Vector Nature of Light, Optical 
Fiber – Single and Multimode, Step index and Graded Index Fibers, Ray and Wave picture of 
propagation, Cut -off, mode field diameter, group delay, Gaussian field approximation. (8 
Lectures) 
Transmission Characteristics: The consequences of attenuation and dispersion in Optical 
Fibers: Material, Waveguide, Polarization, Intermodal and Intramodal Dispersion, Group 
velocity Dispersion, Dispersion modified single mode fibers. Fiber Fabrication Me thods. (6 
Lectures)  
(Fractal 2)  PHL7XX2 Optical Fibers and Communication [1 -0-0] Attenuation, dispersion 
and pulse band width, refractive index profile, bend loss, other parameters. (5 lectures) 
Erbium doped fiber amplifiers: Optical amplification, gain spectrum and bandwidth, noise in 
EDFA, WDM. (4 lectures) 
Fiber optic communications- Dispersion management and WDM systems, bit -error rate, signal-
to-noise ratio, Optical communications. (5 lectures) 
(Fractal 3) PHL7XX3 Nonliear Fiber Optics  [1 -0-0]Photonic crystal fibers : Index and 
photonic bandgap guiding mechanism, endless single -mode guidance, fiber optic sensors. (7 
lectures) 
Nonlinear phenomena in optical fibers: Nonlinear refraction, nonlinear pulse propagation, self -
phase modulation, changes in pul se spectra, optical wave breaking, optical solitons, cross -
phase modulation. (7 lectures) 
Textbook  
1. Ghatak, A. K., and Thyagarajan, K., Introduction to Fiber Optics, Cambridge University 
Press 1998. 
2. Agrawal, G. P., Nonlinear fiber optics, Academic press, 4th edition, 2007. 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Rastogi, V., Fiber Optics, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/115107095/.    
Reference Course Material  
1. Crisp, J. and Elliot, B., Introduction to Fiber Optics, 3rd edition, Newnes, 2005. 
 
 
  
 
Title Energy Harvesting Technologies Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Make the students understand different energy harvesting technologies from 
unconventional resources and waste energy management. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the energy harvesting technologies and their applications in different domains.  
 
Contents  
Energy sources: Non-renewable and renewable energy sources, Energy demand and crisis 
nexus, waste energies and their harvesting (5 lectures) 
Harvesting Waste Mechanical Energy:  Principle of piezoelectricity, piezoelectric materials, their 
characterizations, common piezoel ectric materials e.g. PZT, ZnO. Recent trends on new 
materials ceramics and polymer composites; Principles of energy harvesting using 
piezoelectric effect, Electrical equivalent modelling, examples of energy harvesting systems 
e.g. Human body motion based,  human shoe based and human joint based energy 
harvesters, Energy from natural sources: wind and water flow, Energy from transportation 
etc (15 lectures) 
Nanopiezoelectric materials and devices : Nanopiezoelectric effect, materials for 
nanogenerators, princ iples of nanogenerators, devices, characterization, current trends in 
materials. (7 lectures) 
Thermal Waste Energy harvesting: Thermoelectric effect and related principles, such as 
Seebeck and Peltier effect, Thomson effect, Thermoelectric device materials  and 
characterization, Strategies for improving thermoelectric performance, Nanostructured 
thermoelectric materials; principle of pyroelectric effect, pyroelectric and electrocaloric 
coefficients, pyroelectric figure of merit, pyroelectric materials, Therm al phase change 
materials for waste energy harvesting, principles and materials. (10+05 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Priya, S., Inman, D. J., Energy Harvesting Technologies, Springer (2009). 
2. Mescia, L., Losito, O., Prudenzano, F.,  Innovative Materials and Systems  for Energy 
Harvesting Applications, IGI Global (2015)  
 
Reference Books  
1. Kazmierski, T. J., Beeby, S., Energy Harvesting Systems, Springer (2011). 
2. Yang, B., Liu, H., Liu, J., Lee, C., Micro and Nano Energy Harvesting Technologies , Artech 
House (2015) 
 
Online Course Material  
1. W. Tester, Jefferson,  Kazimi, Mujid S., Shao -Horn, Yang, Ghoniem, Ahmed F. 
Fundamentals of Advanced Energy Conversion,   
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/mechanical-engineering/2-60-fundamentals-of-advanced-
energy-conversion-spring-2004/# 
 
 
 
  
Title Solar Energy Technologies Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Make the students understand energy technologies such as solar photovoltaics, solar 
thermal together with solar radiation. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the solar technologies and their applications. 
Contents  
Basic Concepts of Solar Radiation: Radiation fundamentals, types of radiation, measurements, 
and its usages. (10 lectures) 
Solar photovoltaics: Principles of solar cells, their types and working mechanisms, generation 
and recombination of carriers, types of recombination, Details about p -n homo and hetero 
junctions, inorga nic and organic junction based PV devices, analysis and characterization. 
Effect of temperature on device performance. (10 lectures) 
Solar thermal : Solar thermal technologies (concentrating and non -concentrating) and their 
operating principles, classificat ion based on temperature ranges and their applications, 
Component analysis, Introduction to solar thermal plants and energy generation. (10 
lectures) 
Energy storage: Electrical energy storage using batteries and supercapacitors, principles, 
issues and challenges, current state of the art; Thermal energy storage using phase change 
and thermochemical means, principles, materials, issues and challenges. (10 lectures)  
Textbook  
1. Nelson, J., (2003), The Physics of Solar Cells, Imperial College Press. 
2. Sukhatme, S.  P., Naik, J. K., Solar Energy: Principles of thermal collection and storage ; 
TMH, 2017. 
 
Reference Books  
1. Wurfel, P., Wurfel, U., (2016), Physics of Solar Cell, Willey VCH. 
2. Duffie, J. A., Beckman, W. A., Solar Engineering of Thermal Processes , John Wiley & Sons 
4th Ed, 2013. 
Online Course Material  
1. Buonassisi, T., Fundamentals of Photovoltaics, 2011, MIT OpenCourseWare : 
http://ocw.mit.edu/2-627F11. 
 
  
Title Quantum Optics and Engineering Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide various aspects of nonclassical/quantum light and its manifestation. 
2. Basic understanding of novel applications of light matter interaction. 
3. Introduce various aspects of Photon distribution and its relevance to applications in 
quantum optics and engineering.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understanding the fundamental principles of quantum optics. 
2. The students will become familiar with concepts such as squeezing, lasing and atom optics  
3. Appreciate and apply quantum optics in newer frontiers of physics. 
 
Contents  
Introduction to Lasers (3 Lectures)  
Quantum theory of radiation: Quantum theory of the free electromagnetic field (3 Lectures) 
Coherent and squeezed states of radiation: Radiation from a classical current; coherent 
states; squeezed state physics and its detection.  (6 Lectures) 
Generation of Entangled Photons and Photon Statistics : Sp ontaneous Parametric Down -
Conversion (SPDC) process, Entangled photon detection, HOM and Franson Interferometer, 
Hanbury-Twiss Interferometer. (7 Lectures) 
Quantum distribution theory: Q, P and W distributions. (5 Lectures) 
Photon-photon interferometry: Ph oton detection and quantum coherence functions. (5 
Lectures) 
Atom-field interaction: Atom-field interaction Hamiltonian; density matrix of two -level atom 
with a single mode field. (7 Lectures) 
Lasing without inversion, coherent trapping, electromagneticall y induced transparency: 
Basic concepts of these quantum interference phenomena.  (6 Lectures) 
Textbook:  
1. Mandel, L. and Wolf, E., Optical Coherence and Quantum Optics, Cambridge University 
Press, 1995.  
2. Scully, M. O. and Zubairy, M.  S., Quantum Optics, Cambridge University Press, 1997. 
3. Loudon, R., The Quantum Theory of Light, Oxford University Press, 2000. 
 
Reference Book: 
1. Agarwal, G. S., Quantum Optics, Cambridge University Press, 2012.  
 
Self-Learning Material: 
1.  Satyanarayana, M. V.,  Department of Physics, IIT Madras, Quantum Optics,  
https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/115106067/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Title Cold Plasma Technologies Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The instructor will: 
1. provide an overview of the importance of cold plasma technologies. 
2. present an overview of commercially important plasma sources, including the fundamental 
principles of their operation and diagnostics.  
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. understand the operating principles of the most sign ificant types of experimental plasma 
sources. 
2. acquire conceptual understanding of plasma measurement tools, different vacuum pumps 
and plasma systems design concepts.  
 
Course Content 
Electrical breakdown of gases - Background ionization, Saturation regime,  Townsend discharge 
and electrical breakdown condition of gases, Paschen Curve, Theory of low -pressure DC 
glow discharge. (10 Lectures) 
RF-driven gas discharges -Capacitive coupling, Inductive coupling, Microwave driven, 
Magnetically enhancement. (5 Lectures) 
High pressure gas discharges - Plasma Arc discharge and Glow discharge concept, Cold 
atmospheric pressure discharge, Dielectric Barrier Discharges, Cold Plasma Jets, 
Microplasmas. (5 Lectures) 
Vacuum Pumps and Instrumentation -Mechanical, diffusion, turbo  molecular pumps. Vacuum 
gauges, Gas regulators, Residual gas analysers, Leak detection. (5 Lectures) 
Plasma Diagnostics - Overview of plasma diagnostics, Langmuir probe, Magnetic probe, 
Emissive probe, Measurement of circuit parameters including current, v oltage and power, 
Fundamentals of emission of radiations by plasmas and their measurements. (8 Lectures)      
Laboratory Plasma Applications - Plasma treatment of surfaces, Plasma deposition of the 
surfaces, Plasma Etching, Cold plasma applications in healt h, food and agriculture, Plasma 
Lighting devices, Nanoscale fabrications and plasma for biomedicines. (8 lectures) 
 
Text Books  
1. Yuri P. Raizer, Gas Discharge Physics, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 1991. 
2. J. Reece Roth, Industrial Plasma Engineering, Vol. 1 & 2, Institute of Physics Publishing, 
2003. 
3. P.I John, Plasma Sciences and the Creation of Wealth, Tata McGraw-Hill Education 
Company Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi, 2005. 
 
Reference Books 
1. I. H. Huchinson, Principles of plasma diagnostics, Cambridge University Press, 1987 
2. Michael Lieberman and Allan J. Lichtenberg, Principles of Plasma Discharges and Materials 
Processing, John Wiley, 2005. 
 
Online course material 
1. Tripathi, V.K.,Plasma Physics: Fundamentals and Applications , NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/115102020/. 
 
  
Title Critical Phenomena and Renormalization Group Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Help in understanding the basic concepts of critical phenomena. 
2. Help in grasping the concepts of the renormalization group 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Grasp the concept of universality in phase transitions, crucial for understanding critical 
phenomena. 
2. Understand scaling and renormalization group ideas. 
 
Contents    
Introduction to critical phenomena: Phase Transitions and Transfer Matrix, Order Parameter 
and Cluster Properties, Stochastic Processes and Phase Transitions, The Ising model, 
the mean field, correlation functions. (10 Lectures) 
Landau theory:  The Landau theory of phase transitions,  Universality within the Mean Field 
Approximation, Critique of the Landau approximation, and the Ginzburg criterion, Power 
Counting and the Role of Dimension Four. (10 Lectures) 
Real-space Renormalization Group: Renormalization Group (RG) transformation of  the 
Hamiltonian and its fixed points, Relations between critical exponents from RG, some 
applications of the linearized RG transformations. (6 Lectures) 
Momentum-space Renormalization Group: RG transformation in wave number space, 
Scaling dimension: anoma lous and normal, Partition function and fixed points for the 
Gaussian model. (10 Lectures) 
Two-dimensional models: The X Y model, Nonlinear sigma-models. (6 Lectures) 
 
Textbook 
1.Ma, S. K., (1976), Modern theory of critical phenomena. Benjamin, Philadelphia. 
2.Bellac, M. L., (1991), Quantum and Statistical Field Theory, Clarendon Press, Oxford. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Zinn-Justin., J., (1989), Quantum field theory and critical phenomena, Oxford University 
Press, Oxford. 
 
Online Course Material 
 
1. Sa ntra, S. B., Advanced Statistical Mechanics , NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati,http://nptel.ac.in/courses/115103028/. 
2. Kardar, M., 8.334 Statistical Mechanics II, Spring 2014, MIT OpenCourseWare 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology,https://ocw.mit.edu 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Title Non-perturbative aspects of Quantum Field 
Theory 
Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Help in understanding the basic ideas of non-perturbative phenomena. 
2. Help in grasping the basic models of non-perturbative quantum field theory (QFT). 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Grasp the concepts of QFT beyond the perturbation regimes. 
2.Understand some of the important tools needed for non-perturbative QFT. 
 
Contents 
Introduction to general properties of QFT: Relativistic covariance, microcausality and 
ultraviolet singularities, Wightman functions and their properties; Euclidean QFT, 
Osterwalder-Schrader condition, local structure of QFT, Haag theorem; Schwinger 
model, Thirring model. (6 Lectures) 
Kinks and Domain Walls:  Humps of energy with a topological basis. Formation of kinks and 
domain walls during a phase transition, Kibble and  Kibble-Zurek mechanisms. Action of 
kink and domain walls. (8 Lectures) 
Solitons and Instantons: Relativistic quantum field theories starting from classical solutions 
of the corresponding non - nonlinear field equations. Classical field equations belong to 
either the Minkowskian metric or to Euclidean equations. The Minkowskian solutions will 
have finite energy with a localised, non -dispersive energy density; referred to as 
solitons. Correspondence between classical soliton solutions of any given field theor y 
and extended-particle states of the quantised version of that theory will be discussed. 
Instantons are localised finite -action classical solutions of the Euclidean version of the 
field equations of any given model.  They lead to tunnelling effects that c an significantly 
affect the structure of the vacuum state. It will be discussed how the existence of a 
non-zero topological index, in the instantons, leads to the generation of a family of 
vacuum states, characterized by a vacuum angle theta. (20 Lectures) 
Non-Linear Sigma Model: Models possessing global symmetries non -linearly realized on the 
fields.  This model has an 0(N) symmetry, the field being a N -vector of fixed length. In 
this context, the 1/N expansion will be discussed. Also, discussed will be th e connection 
of the O(2) model to the sine-Gordan and massive Thirring models. (8 Lectures) 
 
Textbook 
1.Rajaraman, R., (1989), Solitons and Instantons, North-Holland. 
2.Abdalla, E., Abdalla, M. C. B., and Rothe, K. D., (2001), Non-perturbative methods in 2 
Dimensional QFT, World Scientific, Singapore. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Zinn-Justin., J., (1989), Quantum field theory and critical phenomena, Oxford University 
Press, Oxford. 
 
Online Course Material 
1. Govindarajan, S., Classical Field Theory, NPTEL Course Mat erial, Department of Physics, 
Indian Institute of Technology Madras,http://nptel.ac.in/courses/115106058/. 
 
2. Hanany, A., 8.871 Selected Topics in Theoretical Particle Physics: Branes and Gauge 
Theory Dynamics, MIT OpenCourseWare Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology,https://ocw.mit.edu 
 
 
  
Title Nuclear Engineering Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide various aspects of Nuclear Engineering from perspective nuclear power plant and 
its safety.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. In understanding fundamental principles of nuclear engineering. 
 
Contents  
PHL7XX1  Nuclear Reactor and Safety  (2-0-0) 
Introduction to Nuclear Physics: (2 Lecture).  
Nuclear Decay Series : U, Th, Pu and Other radioactive sources and their decay series; basic 
understanding of differential cross-section and half-life. (6 Lecture) 
Nuclear Reactors: Reactor Physics and Pressurized Water Reactor, Boiling Water Reactor, Fast -
Breeder Reactor (FBR), Reactor Design (Heavy Water, Liquid Metal and Gas). (12 Lecture) 
Nuclear Safety : Reactor Safety, Structural Mechanics, Accidents and Contamination. (8 
Lecture) 
 
PHL7XX2  Fluid Flow and Power cycles   (1-0-0) 
Fluid Flow and Power Cycles: Single -Phase Flow & Two -Phase Flow, Heat -Exchangers Design 
and Different Power Cycles. (14 Lectures) 
 
Textbooks:  
1. Glasstone, S.  and Sesonske, A., Nuclear Reactor Engineering, D. Van Nostrand Company, 
1967. 
2. Knief, R. A.  Nuclear Engineering: Theory and Technology of Commercial Nuclear Power. 
2nd ed. La Grange Park, 2008. 
 
Reference books:  
1. Oka, Y., (Eds.), Nuclear Reactor Design, Springer-Verlag, Tokyo, 2010.  
 
 
Self-Learning Material:  
1.  Kannan,  I.,  Department of Mechanical Engineering, IIT Bombay, Nuclear Engineering, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112101007/. 
 
 
  
Title Vacuum Systems and Thin Film Technology Number PHL8XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite Introduction to Characterization & Advanced 
Condensed Matter Physics 
  
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce basic concept of vacuum science and thin film depositions & characterizations 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the physical concepts behind the thin film depositions by CVD and PVD systems  
2. Knowledge about vacuum pumps and gauges 
3. Design protocols for thin film deposition and characterization 
 
Contents  
Vacuum technology: Production of Vacuum - Mechanical pumps, Diffusion pump, Getter 
and Ion pumps, Cryopumps, Pressure Measurements Gauges, Leak Detection. (5 lectures)  
Physical Vapor Deposition: Hertz Knudsen equation; mass evaporation rate; Knudsen cell, 
Directional distribution of evaporating species, Evaporation of elements, compounds, 
alloys, Raoult‟s law; e-beam, pulsed laser and ion beam evaporation, Glow Discharge and 
Plasma, Sputtering–mechanisms and yield, DC and RF sputtering, Bias sputtering, 
magnetically enhanced sputtering systems, reactive sputtering, Hybrid and Modified PVD - 
Ion plating, reactive evaporation, ion beam assisted sputtering. (11 lectures) 
Chemical Vapor Deposition: reaction chemistry and thermodynamics of CVD; Thermal 
CVD, laser & plasma enhanced CVD, Chemical Techniques - Spray Pyrolysis, Electro-
deposition, Sol- Gel and LB Techniques (8 lectures) 
Nucleation & Growth: capillarity theory, atomistic and kinetic models of nucleation, basic 
modes of thin film growth, stages of film growth & mechanisms, amorphous thin films, 
Epitaxy–homo, hetero and coherent epitaxial layers, lattice misfit and imperfections, 
epitaxy of compound semiconductors. (8 lectures) 
Film Formation and Structure: Capillarity Theory, Atomistic Nucleation Processes, Cluster 
Coalescence and Depletion, Experimental Studies of Nucleation and Growth, Grain 
Structure of Films and Coatings (5 lectures) 
Methods for characterization of film properties: chemical composition, microstructure, 
optical, mechanical and electrical properties (5 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Ohring, M., The materials science of Thin films, Academic Press Ltd, 2nd Edition, 2002 
2. Chopra, K. L., Thin Film Phenomena, McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1969 
3. Smith D. L., Thin Film Deposition: Principles and Practice, McGraw Hill 1995 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Shekhar, S. and Gaur, A., Fundamentals of Material Processing Part 2 (Module 2) , IIT 
Kanpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113104075/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Title Plasma Diagnostics Number PHL8XX0 
Department Physics L-P-T (C) 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for PhD   
Prerequisite Cold Plasma Technologies   
Objectives  
The instructor will: 
1. provide an overview of the important plasma diagnostic and data analysis tools, which 
are used in process development and plasma reactor monitoring. 
2. provide students a critical appreciation of where and when specific techniques are 
applicable.   
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. understand the fundamental principles of electrical, optical and particle measurement 
techniques. 
2. understand quantitatively the validity of plasma measurements.   
3. distinguish process control issues and chalk out strategies for specific plasma process  
Course Content 
Plasma Parameters-Electron and Ion plasma densities, temperature, and particle distribution 
functions. Wall fluxes of charged and neutral species, energy distribution functions. Plasma 
emission. Plasma operating regimes. (7 Lectures) 
Electrical Measurements - Electrical Probes (Langmuir  single, double probes, emissive 
proves), Current transformers, Rogowski coil, dielectric charging and laser heated 
techniques. (8 Lectures) 
Optical and Spectroscopic Techniques -Fundamentals of emission of radiation by plasmas. 
Corona equilibrium, Local -thermodynamic equilibrium (LTE), Collinsonal -radiative (CR) 
processes. Line shapes and broadening, i.e., Natural Broadening, Doppler Broadening, Stark 
Broadening, line shifts. Absorption spectroscopy and active techniques including LIF (Laser 
Induced Fluorescence) technique. (12 Lectures) 
Particle Measurements and Process Control -Energy analysers ( Ion-energy analyzers, 
Faraday Cup),  ion mass spectrometry, process gas analysis in plasmas, process control 
strategies. statistical process analysis, end point detection. (8 lectures) 
Data analysis software and tools- Data analysis introduction and overview of COMSOL, Vsim, 
Oopic-pro, Atomic Data and Analysis Structure, Interactive Data Language, Matlab and 
Origin. (7 lectures) 
Text Books  
1. I. H. Huchinson, Principles of plasma diagnostics, Cambridge University Press, 1987. 
2. P.I John, Plasma Sciences and the Creation of Wealth, Tata McGraw-Hill Education Company 
Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi, 2005 
 
 
Reference Books 
1. Lochte-Holtgreven, Plasma Diagnostics, AIP Press American Institute of Physics, New York 
(1995) 
2. P.C. Stangeby, Plasma Diagnostics, Vol. 2, Surface analysis and interactions, Academic 
Press, Boston (1989) 
Preparatory Course Material  
1. Ram Prakash, Book Chapter  “Recent Trends in Plasma Chemistry and Spectroscopy 
Diagnostics” Research Methodology in Chemical Sciences: Experimental and Theoretical 
Approach, Applied Academic Press, USA (2016). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Title Materials and device characterization Number PHL8XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite Introduction to Material Characterization   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce the advanced characterization tools for materials and devices 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the concepts and theory underlying the modern techniques employed to 
determine semiconductor material and device parameters. 
 
Contents  
Introduction to materials characterization and their necessity including physical, chemical 
and electrical characterization. (2 lectures) 
Structural and crystallographic Characterization: X-ray, neutron and electron diffraction, 
LEED, RHEED, characterization of crystalline and non-crystalline materials. (6 lectures) 
Microscopy techniques: Geometrical optics and optical microscopy, Scanning electron and 
Transmission electron microscopy. (10 lectures) 
Optical spectroscopy: UV-Vis and FTIR spectroscopy, Raman spectroscopy with introduction 
vibrational spectroscopic concepts. (4 lectures) 
Magnetic measurement techniques: SQUID magnetometer, temperature and field 
dependent magnetic measurements using PPMS and SQUID, introduction magnetic imaging 
techniques such as MRI and NMRI. (6 lectures) 
Electrical measurement:Drude model introduction, Four probe resistivity measurements, 
Van der Pauw method, Hall measurement, PN junction measurements, Schottky barriers, 
Thermally stimulated current spectroscopy. (6 lectures) 
Low temperature measurements: Introduction to cryogens, Dewars, He-4/3 cryostat, 
Dilution cryostat, Adiabatic demagnetization, Resistance thermometry. (4 lectures) 
Mossbauer spectroscopy techniques: Principle, method, experiments for material 
characterization, X-ray photoelectron/Auger spectroscopy measurements. (4 lectures) 
 
 
Textbook  
1. Schroder, D. K., Semiconductor material and device characterization , Wiley 3 rd Edition, 
2015 
2. Zhang, S., Li, L. and Kumar, A., Materials characterization techniques, CRC press, 2008 
3. Egerton, R. F., Physical principles of electron microscopy: An introduction to TEM, SEM and 
AEM, Springer, 2005 
 
Self Learning Material  
1.Biswas, K., NPTEL course: Advanced Characterization Techniques , IIT Kanpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/113104004/     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Title Computational Condensed Matter Physics Number PHL8XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–1 [4] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite Computational Materials Science   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Help in understanding the condensed matter physics concept and their correlation in   
    materials properties. 
2. help students to implement the concept to apply for computing materials properties. 
3. Encourage students to apply the computational conde nsed matter physics knowledge in 
their research if interested. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Learn the concept of condensed matter and computational aspects for real implementation  
2. Design application driven materials need  
 
Contents  
Basic Concepts in Electronic Structure: Interacting electron & nuclei systems, Forces & 
stress  
theorems, a bit of statistical mechanics and density matrix. Independent electron  
approximation, Exchange & correlation. Periodic solids and electron bands. Uniform electron  
gas model. (5 lectures) 
Hartee-Fock approximation: Non-interacting systems (2 lectures) 
Density Functional Theory (DFT): Thomas -Fermi model, The Hohenberg -Kohn theorems, 
Extension of H ohenberg-Khon theorems, formulation of DFT. The Kohn -Sham vibrational 
principle. (8 lectures) 
Functionals for exchange correlation: Local/ spin density approximation (LDA/LSDA), 
Generalized-gradient approximations (GGAs), Orbital dependent functional, Hybrid functionals. 
Electronic structure of atom and pseudopotential: scattering amplitude and pseudopotentials, 
orthogonalized plane wave (OPWs) and pseudopotentials, Nrom -conserving pseudopotentials, 
unscreening and core correction, Ultrasoft pseudopotential s, Projector augumented waves 
(PAWs) (16 lectures) 
Computation of electronic band structure: Self -consistent solution of coupled Kohn -Sham 
equations, Total energy functionals, Force & stress (5 lectures) 
Practical applications: Introduction to supercells, surfaces, interfaces, phonons and defects, 
other material properties such as magnetic, ferroelectric and piezoelectric properties. Thermal 
properties using phonon dispersion. (6 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Marder, M. P., Condensed Matter Physics, Wiley, 2000 
2. Sholl, D., and Steckel, J. A., Density Functional Theory: A Practical Introduction, Wiley-      
Interscience, 2009 
Reference Books  
1. Martin, R. M., Electronic Structure Basic Theory and Practical Methods , Cambridge 
University Press, 2004 
2. Kittel C. C., Quantum Theory of Solids, John Wiley & Sons Inc, 1987 
3. Journal articles for relevant sections 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Online resources: http://www.quantum-espresso.org/ (For computational purpose and 
online lectures and reading materials) 
 
 
 
 
  
Title Semiconductor Device Technology Number PHL8XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite Advanced Condensed Matter Physics   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce basic properties of semiconductors, physical principles and operational 
characteristics of semiconductor devices 
2. Put forth advanced device issues relevant to state-of-the-art integrated-circuit 
technologies. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Familiarize with the physical concepts behind the solid state electronics devices 
 
Contents  
Physics and Properties of Semiconductors: crystal structure, energy bands, statistics, Fermi 
level, carrier concentration at thermal equilibrium, carrier transport phenomena, Hall eff ect, 
recombination, optical and thermal properties, basic properties for semiconductor operation. 
(5 lectures) 
Device Processing Technology: oxidation, diffusion, ion-implantation, deposition, 
lithography, etching and interconnect. (8 lectures) 
p-n Junction: depletion region, diffusion, generation-recombination, current-voltage 
characteristics, junction breakdown, charge storage and transient behavior. (4 lectures) 
Bipolar transistor: transistor action and dependence on device structure, charge control 
switching model, Ebers-Moll Model, current-voltage characteristics, non-ideal and limiting 
effects at extremes of bias. (6 lectures) 
State-of-the-Art Bipolar Transistor Technology: poly-si emitters, narrow base, structural 
tradeoffs in optimizing performance. (3 lectures) 
Metal-Semiconductor Contacts: equilibrium, idealized metal semiconductor junctions, 
nonrectifying (ohmic) contacts, Schottky diodes, tunneling. (4 lectures) 
Metal-Oxide-Silicon System: MOS structure, capacitance, oxide and interface charge 
(charging of traps, tunneling through oxide). (4 lectures) 
MOS Field-Effect Transistor: threshold voltage, derivation of current-voltage characteristics, 
dependence on device structure. (3 lectures) 
State-of-the-Art MOS Technology: small-geometry effects, mobility degradation due to 
channel and oxide fields, velocity saturation, hot-electron effects. (3 lectures) 
Modern CMOS Technologies: CMOS Process flow starting from Substrate selection to 
multilevel metal formation, comparison between bulk and SOI CMOS technologies. (2 
lectures)   
Textbook  
1. Donald , A. N., Semiconductor Physics and Devices, Tata McGraw-Hill, 2007. 
2. Sze, S.M., Physics of Semiconductor Devices, John Wiley & Sons, 2001. 
3. James,P., Deal, M. and Griffin P., Silicon VLSI Technology, Prentice Hall, Electronics and 
VLSI series, 2000 
Self Learning Material  
1. Fonstad, C., Jr, MIT Open course: Microelectronic Devices and Circuits, 
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-012-
microelectronic-devices-and-circuits-fall-2009/index.htm 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Title Understanding Scanning Tunneling 
Microscope 
Number PHL8XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite Electronic Transport in Mesoscopic Systems   
Objectives 
To understand the principles behind scanning tunneling microscope. 
Learning Outcomes 
One can get acquainted and operate scanning tunneling microscope. 
Contents 
Overview:Tunneling an elementary model, probing electronic structure in atomic scale, 
spatially resolved scanning spectroscopy, lateral resolution, origin of atomic resolution in STM, 
tip-sample interaction effects. (6 lectures) 
Imaging Mechanism: atom-scale tunneling, perturbation approach, image force, the square -
barrier problem, modified Bardeen approach, effect of image force on tunneling, tunneling 
matrix elements, tip wavefunctions, Green‟s function and tip wavefunctions, wavefunctions at 
surfaces, related model, concept of surface states, field emission spectroscopy, atom -beam 
diffraction, first principles theoretical studies. (10 lectures) 
Imaging crystalline surfaces:types of STM images, surfaces with one -dimensional corrugation, 
surface with tetragonal, hexagonal or trigonal symmetry, corrugation inversion, the S -wave-
tip model. (5 lectures) 
Imaging atomic statesand the role of atomic force in tunneling: Slater atomic wavefunctions, 
profiles of atomic states as seen by STM, Na-atom tip model, images of surfaces: Independent 
orbital approximation, effect of atomic force in STM, attractive atomic force as a tunneling 
phenomenon, attractive atomic force and tunneling conductance. (11 lectures) 
Tip-sample Interactions and scanning tunneling spectr oscopy:Local modification of sample 
wavefunction, deformation of tip and sample surface, electronics for spectroscopy, nature of 
the spectra, tip -treatment for spectroscopy studies, The Fenestra parameter, ex situ and in 
situ determination of tip DOS. (10 lectures) 
 Textbook 
1.Chen, C. J., Introduction to Scanning Tunneling Microscopy, Oxford University, 2012 
Reference Books 
2.Weisendanger, R., Scanning Probe Spectroscopy and Microscopy, Cambridge Uni. 
Online Course Material1.    Review of Quantum Tunneling/Introduction to 
STM:http://nanohub.org/resources/9600 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Teaching Laboratories 
Atomic and Nuclear Physics Laboratory (Course No. PHP6XX0) 
 
S. No. Name of the Experiment 
1.  Recording of Hydrogen Spectra  
2.  Zeeman effect 
3.  Gamma Ray Spectrometer (Energy resolved)  
4.  Alpha particle spectrometer (Energy resolved)  
5.  Radiation Counter for Alpha and Beta Particle (ZnSe for Alpha 
And Plastic scintillation counter for beta particle) 
6.  Radiation Counter for  
Gamma and Beta Particle 
7.  Finding the Plateau region of GM Tube   
8.  Alpha particle counter (only for alpha particle)  
9.  Compton Scattering 
 
Electronics Laboratory (Course No. PHP6XX0) 
 
S. No. Name of Experiment 
1 JFET biasing and its application as an amplifier. 
2 Differential Amplifier as double ended input and single ended output. Differential 
Amplifier as single ended input and double ended output. 
3 Op-Amp circuit and inverting and non-inverting amplifiers. Find out the output 
offset voltage, maximum output current, slew rate, and power bandwidth. 
4 Summing, subtractor, differentiator, and integrator. 
5 Four types of negative feedback such as VCVS, VCIS, ICVS, and ICIS will used to 
show the reduction of non-linear distortion and output offset voltage. 
6 Active Butterworth low-pass, high-pass, wide bandpass, and narrow bandpass 
filters. 
7 Active diode circuits and comparator as peak detector, limiter, DC clamper, limit 
detector. 
8 Wave shaping circuit by using Schmitt trigger. 
9 The Wien Bridge Oscillator, LC Oscillator circuit  
10 Use of 555 timer for astable multivibrator, monostable multivibrator and construct 
an alarm circuit. 
11 Different logic gates such as NOT, AND, OR, NAND, NOR, XOR gates 
12 RS NAND latch, clocked D Latch, JK Flip Flop and verify frequency division 
function, T Flip-Flop, 
13 To study the performance of a quartz-controlled TTL clock oscillator. 
14 Monostable, astable multivibrator using TTL circuits. 
15 Half-adder, full-adder, subtractor, construction of four-bit adder, and four-bit 
adder-subtractor  
16 Use of Shift Register for showing SIPO, PIPO, and PIPO operation. 
17  Operation of a binary ripple up-counter, and down counter. 
18 Study the characteristics of a BCD to decimal decoder. 
19 To study the functioning of multiplexer and its application for the generation of 
Boolean functions. 
20 To demonstrate the functions performed by decoder using a seven segment LED 
display. 
21 To study the operation of a D/A converter based on a R/2R network 
 
Condensed Matter Physics Laboratory (Course No. PHP6XX0) 
 
S. No. Name of Experiment 
1 Hall effect with temperature 
2  Electrical Conductivity Measurements using four probe resistivity with 
temperature 
3 Vibrational spectroscopy (Raman) 
4 Phonon Dispersion curve 
5 Band gap measurements 
6 Photoluminescence Spectroscopy studies of Materials 
7 Solar cell characterization 
8 Studies on Thermoelectric properties of materials 
9 Thermoelectric Device Characterization 
10 ESR Spectroscopy 
11 Magnetic Susceptibility Measurements 
12 Study of Thermoluminescence of F-centres in Alkali Halide crystals 
 
Optics & Lasers Laboratory (Course No. PHP6XX0) 
 
S. No. Name of the Experiment 
1. To find the wavelength of monochromatic light 
To determine the spacing between the plates of fabry Perot etalon from the fringe 
Pattern  
To find the finesse and free spectral range (FSR) of etalon from the fringe 
calibration at different cavity thickness 
2. To find the refractive index of an unknown solution. 
3. To study the birefringence with respect to applied voltage in an electro optic liquid 
4. Numerical aperture, splice loss and bending loss measurement of multi-mode fiber 
. Numerical aperture and mode field diameter measurement of single mode fiber . 
Calculation of normalized frequency or V-number of single mode fiber . 
Determination of refractive index of transparent solids 
5. To calculate the peak wavelength and spectral bandwidth of LEDs. To analyze 
emission spectrum of laser and study the peak wavelength. 
6. To find out the difference in wavelength of D1 and D2 lines of sodium light. To 
determine the wavelength of monochromatic light 
7. To determine wavelength of laser beam.  
To find refractive index of a transparent material. 
8. To study Gaussian nature of the laser beam. To find diameter (beam spot size) of 
the laser beam. To determine divergence of the laser beam. 
9. Diffraction of light by single slit, double slit, single wire, cross wire and 
transmission grating 
10. Intensity measurement as a function of analyzer angle  
Polarization study by quarter wave plate - elliptical and circular polarization.  
Polarization study by half wave plate - change of polarization axis.  Verification of 
Malus' law 
 
Computational Laboratory (Course No. PHP6XX0) 
 
S. No. Name of Experiment 
1 Implementation of nonlinear root finding techniques 
2  Interpolation techniques 
3 Curve fittings 
4 Solving ordinary differential equations 
5 Simulations of physical systems, Monte Carlo technique etc 
6 Solution of Schrodinger like equation 
7 Solution of Helmohz equation (Propagation study) 
8 Quantum Simulation 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hands-on Experiments 
  
Hands-on Experiments (High end equipments) (PHP6XX0) 
 
S. No. Topic 
1. Amplitude and frequency modulation circuits (Digital Storage Oscilloscope) 
2. Regulated power supplies and their performance evaluation (DSO) 
3. Solar cell construction and characterization (XRD, UV-VIS, SEM, etc.) 
4. Magnetic moment detection (MPMS, PPMS, etc.) 
5. Optoelectronic Properties of Materials (Raman, PPMS) 
6. Construction of coupled prism experimental set up and demonstration of tunneling 
phenomenon 
7. Construction of telescope and observation of stellar objects 
8. Measurement of speed of light using oscillations (DSO , Fast Photodiode) 
9. Life-time of muon (Scintillation detector, Data acquisition and processing system, 
Python coding) 
10. Optical fibre characterization (Laser source, Communication Fibre, Photodetector) 
11. Optical cloaking 
12. Nanomaterials Characterization (XRD, AFM, SEM, PPMS, etc.) 
13. Paschen Curve -Dependence of break-down voltage on the pressure and inter-
electrode gap for a given gas in plasma discharge 
14. Measurement of Plasma parameters by electrostatic probe 
15. Characterization of DC magnetron discharge and estimation of sputtering yield  
16.  Generation and characterization of  non-thermal and non-equilibrium cold plasma 
 
  
Hands-on Experiments (Computational Tools) (PHP6XX0) 
 
S. No. Topic 
1. Ray tracing for design of solar concentrator 
2. Use of COSMOL software for macroscopic multiphysics phenomena 
3. Rsoft software for visualization of optical components and devices 
4. Optifibre for visualization of optical communication through optical fibres 
5. Design of optoelectronic materials using DFT 
6. Molecular dynamics simulation using LAMMPS and GROMACS 
7. Simulation of magnetic domains using Micromagnetics 
8. Gamma ray burst (GRB) data analysis from the Fermi-GBM space telescope. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Title General Theory of Relativity Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. give the student a basic understanding of the General Theory of Relativity and its 
importance for modern physics.  
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. have detailed insight regarding theory and dynamics related to gravity. 
2. be able to apply the theory of general relativity in many fields of physics for example in 
astrophysics and cosmology. 
 
Contents  
Preliminary discussions:  Review of special theory of relativity, vector and tensor, particle 
dynamics, electrodynamics, energy momentum tensor, relativistic hydrodynamics. 
Principle of equivalence:  Statement of the principle,gravitational forces, geodesic –affine 
connection, Newtonian limit. (8 Lectures) 
Tensor analysis : Tensor algebra, tensor density, transformation of affine connection, 
covariant differentiation, gradient, divergence, curl, parallel transport. (8 Lectures)  
Curvature: curvature tensor, Bianchi identity, Ricci ten sor, curvature scalar, Killing vectors 
and symmetries. (5 Lectures) 
Einstein's field equation : Derivation of field equation, Schwarzschild solution, Birkhoff's 
theorem, geodesic equation in Schwarzschild space time, Precession of perihelion of 
mercury, bending of light rays, gravitational red shift. (8 Lectures) 
Stellar equilibrium and collapse : Differential equation for stellar structure, White dwarfs, 
neutron stars, comoving coordinates, Schwarzschild blackholes, collapse to a blackholes.  
Gravitational radiation: (10 Lectures) 
Universe: Friedmann-Robertson-Walker solution, our Universe. (3 Lectures) 
Textbook  
1. Weinberg, S., Gravitation and Cosmology: Principle and Applications of the General Theory 
of Relativity, 1st Ed.,  John Willey & Sons 1972. 
2.  Hartle, J. B., Gravity, 1st Ed. , Pearson education 2011. 
3.  Misner, C.W., Thorne, K. S. and Wheeler, J. A., Gravitation, Princeton University Press 2017 
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Schutz, B., General Relativity, Cambridge University Press 2011 
2. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hbmf0bB38h0&list=PLGI_2C39f-
V1AACba_7pZP8A9M7PmQJqx 
3. Bertschinger, E. W., General Relativity, http://hdl.handle.net/1721.1/36859. 
Preparatory Course Material  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Title Relativistic Quantum Mechanics Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. To obtain an understanding of the key concepts of relativistic quantum mechanics. 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand Klein Gordon and Dirac equations, their significance and transformation 
properties.  
2. Understand various applications of relativistic wave equations.  
Contents  
Klein Gordon Equation: KG equation, The non relativistic limit, Free spin -0 par ticles, The 
charged KG field, Lagrange density and energy -momentum tensor of the KG -field, Lorentz 
Invariance of the KG equation, Charge conjugation and C Parity, Interaction of a spin -0 particle 
with an electromagnetic field, Gauge invariance of the couplings, Lagrange density and energy-
momentum tensor for a KG particle in an electromagnetic field, Solution of KG equation for a 
square-well, exponential and scalar 1/r potential, Basics of Photonics atoms.  (14 Lectures)  
Dirac Equation: Negative Energy Solu tions, Antiparticles, Dirac Hole Theory, Feynman 
interpretation of Antiparticles, Gamma -matrices and their properties, Lagrange density and 
energy-momentum tensor of the free Dirac equation, Covariance of Dirac equation, Pauli‟s 
fundamental theorem, Spinor s under Lorentz transformations, Bilinear covariants, Charge 
conjugation, Parity & Time reversal invariance. (14 Lectures) 
Applications of Dirac Equations:  Majorana representation of Dirac equation, Two component 
theory of neutrino, Spin and Helicity, Dira c particle in one -dimensional square well potential, 
Solution of Dirac equation in a Coulomb and scalar potential, Relativistic Hydrogen atom 
problem, Klein‟s paradox (14 Lectures) 
Textbook  
1. Bjorken, J.D. and Drell, S.D., Relativistic Quantum Mechanics, McGraw-Hill, New York 1998. 
2.Sakurai,J.J., Advanced Quantum Mechanics, Addison-Wesley, 1967. 
3. Greiner, W., Relativistic Quantum Mechanics, Springer, 2000. 
 
 
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Guth, A., Relativistic Quantum Field Theory - I,  http://hdl.handle.net/1721.1/53412 
 
Preparatory Course Material  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Title Particle Physics Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide background to understand the concepts of modern particle physics. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand details of Quantum Electrodynamics, Quantum Chromodynamics and  Weak 
interactions. 
2. Grasp concepts of Standard Model of particle physics and its limitations. 
 
Contents  
 
A preview of Particle Physics:  Elementary particle dynamics, Quark structure of Hadrons, 
Decay rates and cross sections (4 Lectures).  
 
Quantum Electrodynamics (QED):  Elementary QED processes, Anomalous magnetic 
moment, Extracting the moment and evaluating the graphs, Electron self -energy, Pole 
mass, Minimal Subtraction, Counter terms, Two and three point functions, Infrared 
divergences, Jets, Renormalizability of QED. (12 Lectures) 
 
Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD):  Feynman rules for QCD, Elastic and inelastic electron -
proton scattering, The Rosenbluth formula, Parton distribution functions, Callan -Gross 
relation, Dokshitzer -Gribov-Lipatov-Altarelli-Parisi (DGLAP) splitting function, Factorization 
and the parton model,  The operator product expansion (14 Lectures) 
 
Weak and Electroweak Interactions:   The weak charged current interactions, V -A and chiral 
structure of weak interaction, Lepton universalit y, Charged and neutral  current neutrino 
scattering, Electroweak Unification, The Higgs mechanism, Discovery of Higgs Boson, Need 
for physics beyond the standard model. (12 Lectures) 
 
 
 
Textbook 
1. Schwartz, M. D., Quantum Field Theory and the Standard Model, Cambridge University 
Press, 2014. 
2. Thomson, M., Modern Particle Physics, Cambridge University Press, 2016. 
 
 
Self Learning Material  
1.  Susskind, L., New Revolutions in Particle Physics: Basic Concepts, 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2eFvVzNF24g&list=PL768E1383EA79C603 
 
Preparatory Course Material  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Title Quantum Field Theory Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide background to understand basic concepts of quantization of scalar, spinor and 
gauge fields. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand interrelations between quantum fields, symmetry and conservation laws.  
2. Apply the techniques of Feynman rules and diagrams to various elementary scattering pro  
 
Contents  
Classical field theory: Lagrangian and Hamilton ian formalisms; Occupation number 
representation, Noether's theorem, Continuous and discrete symmetries (4 lectures).  
 
Canonical Quantization: General Formulation, Normal ordering, Mode expansion, Quantization 
of real and complex scalar fields, Commutation  relations, Quantization of Dirac fields, Anti -
Commutators, Quantization of massless gauge fields in radiation and Lorentz gauge, 
Quantization of massive vector fields (14 lectures).   
 
Interacting field theory:  Propagators and Green‟s functions, The S -matrix, Perturbation 
expansion of the S -matrix, Wick's Theorem, Feynman Rules and Feynman diagrams for 
interacting scalar field theory and spinor electrodynamics, Lowest Order Cross -Section for 
Rutherford and Mott scattering (16 lectures).  
 
Radiative Correct ions and Renormalization: Casimir effect, Vacuum polarization, Electron 
magnetic moment, Lamb‟s shift, Mass renormalization (8 lectures) 
Textbook  
1. Peskin, M. E. and Schroeder, D. V., An Introduction to Quantum Field Theory , Frontiers in 
Physics, 1995.  
2. Weinberg, S., The Quantum Theory of Fields I, Cambridge University Press, 2008.  
Self Learning Material  
1. Tripathy, P. K., Quantum Field Theory, IIT Madras,  https://nptel.ac.in/courses/115106065/ 
2. Tong D., Lectures on Quantum Field Theory, University of Cambridge , 
http://www.damtp.cam.ac.uk/user/tong/qft.html 
 
Preparatory Course Material  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Title  Photonics Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Pre-requisite  To effect from  
 
Objective  
To understand the fundamental aspects of light wave, its propagation and interaction with the 
medium 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. The students will become familiar with the interesting concepts of photonics and principles of 
polarizers, modulators, waveguides, resonators, lasers and holograms etc. 
2. The course will provide a roadmap to develop specialized knowledge in the field of photonics 
 
Course Content 
 
Wave propagation in dielectric - group velocityand dispersion, pulse spreading, plane wave and 
Helmholtz equation, Gaussian and Bessel beams 
Polarization states and representation - Jones vector, Stokes parameters for polarized and 
unpolarized light, Poincare sphere, Coherence- linewidth, spatial coherence, interferometers 
Light propagation in anisotropic media - electro-optic modulation, acousto -optic interaction, 
modulators 
Fourier optics- free space lig ht propagation, optical Fourier transform, concept of image formation 
and holography, introduction to diffraction    
Photonic crystals and waveguides - periodic media and Bloch waves, concept of photonic bandgap, 
1D, 2D and 3D crystals, dispersion relation, wave-guidance, applications 
Optical Resonators- mode and mode density, losses and spectral width, quality factor, Fabry -Perot 
etalon, optical spectrum analyzers, mode stability, ring resonators, micro-resonators  
Lasers- light amplification, threshold con dition, rate equation, three and four level laser systems, 
transverse and longitudinal mode selection, Q-switching, mode-locking, Applications of lasers   
Nonlinear Optics- physical origin of nonlinear polarization, second order nonlinear phenomena,Kerr 
effect, stimulated Raman scattering, stimulated Brillouin scattering, four-wave mixing  
 
 Textbooks 
1. Yariv, A., and Yeh, P., Photonics, Oxford University Press, 2007. 
2. Saleh, B. E. A., and Teich, M. C., Fundamentals of Photonics, John Wiley & Sons, 2007.  
 Reference Books 
    Ghatak, A. K., and Thyagarajan, K., Optical Electronics, Cambridge University Press, 2002.  
Online Course Material 
   Srinivasan, B., Introduction to Photonics, 
https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc19_ee20/preview 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Title Astrophysics Number PHL7XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Familiarize the basic ideas needed to understand astrophysical phenomena.  
2. Elucidate the nature and properties of compact astrophysical objects. 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. have idea how astrophysical observations, measurements can be carried out and how the 
observational data can be interpreted. 
2. be acquainted with the physics of compact objects. 
 
Contents  
Properties of Sun:  Estimate of surface temperature, luminosity, radius, mass, sun's 
spectrum, composition of sun.  (2 Lectures) 
Fundamental of radiative transfer:  Radiative flux, the specific intensity, radiativ e transfer, 
optical depth, plane parallel atmosphere, the grey atmosphere problem, formation of 
spectral line, opacity, calculation of opacity.  (8 Lectures) 
Properties of stars:  Colour and surface temperature, stellar spectra, spectroscopy parallax. 
the Hertzsprung-Russel diagram, size, mass and temperature of stars.  (6 Lectures) 
Stellar formation and evolution: Hydrostatic equilibrium, virial theorem, Jeans' crieria for star 
formation, brown dwarf, stellar structure equations.  (7 Lectures) 
Nucleosynthesis inside stars:  Possibility of nuclear reactions in stars, Nuclear reaction rates, 
important nuclear reactions in stars, evolution of stars with different masses.  (4 Lectures) 
White dwarfs: - equation of state for degenerate gas, polytropic EoS, Lane -Emden equation, 
Chandrasekhar mass limit. (6 Lectures) 
Neutron stars : Supernova, neutron star, neutron drip, TOV equation, pulsars, magnetic 
dipole model of pulsars, nonvacuum pulsar model, glitch, cooling of neutron stars, neutron 
stars in binary. (6 Lectures) 
Galaxies: Stellar dynamics, Interstellar medium. (3 Lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Rai Choudhari A., Astrophysics for physicists, 1st Ed., Cambridge University Press 2010. 
2. Morison I., Introduction to astronomy and cosmology, 1st Ed., Willey and Sons ltd 2008. 
3. Shapiro, S. L., Teukolsky, S. A., Black Holes, White Dwarfs, and Neutron Stars , 1st ed., 
WILLEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, 2004.  
Self Learning Material  
1. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dpRqK_awV9Y&list=PLy5Ast_vPItFNkraErbQ8AmWEaQ
Mt34Rx 
2. https://www.edx.org/course/introduction-astrophysics-epflx-phys-209-enx 
3. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nzmFc2gjUo4&list=PLE17CC91B39224675 
Preparatory Course Material  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Title Physics of neutrinos Number PHL8XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Prerequisite Particle Physics   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide background to understand the role of neutrinos in probing fundamental 
interactions of nature. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Grasp the theoretical concepts of neutrino oscillations and various neutrino mass models. 
2. Understand details of various currently running and upcoming experimental facilities.  
3.  Understand the role of neutrinos in the early universe.  
 
Contents  
 
Neutrino oscillations: Solar and atmospheric neutrino puzzle s, Neutrino oscillations in vacuum, 
plane wave & wave packet treatment, Neutrino oscillations in constant matter density, MSW 
resonance, Neutrinos through varying matter density, Terrestrial neutrino oscillation 
experiments, Supernova neutrinos. Synchroniz ed & Bipolar oscillations, Spectral split.   (10 
Lectures) 
 
Sterile Neutrinos: LSND anomaly, More neutrino species, MiniBoone experiment, New 
anomalies - Reactor neutrino anomaly and Gallium experiments calibration anomaly, Proposed 
future experiments, Sterile neutrinos in astrophysics and cosmology.  (10 Lectures) 
 
Neutrino Nature and Mass:  Absolute mass experiments , Dirac and Majorana masses for 
neutrinos, Neutrinoless double beta decay, Neutrino mass models, Seesaw mechanism, Type I, 
II and III Seesaw mo dels, Zee model, Left -right symmetric model, GUT -based models, 
Supersymmetric models.  (10 Lectures) 
 
Neutrino Cosmology: Robertson–Walker metric, Dynamics of expansion, The cosmic neutrino 
background, Neutrino temperature, Energy density of light massive neutrinos, Energy density 
of heavy neutrinos, Neutrinos as dark matter.  (8 Lectures) 
 
Ultra-high energy Neutrinos : Neutrinos from Astrophysical objects: AGNs, GRBs, GZK 
neutrinos, Neutrino Astronomy.  (4 Lectures) 
 
Textbook 
1.Giunti, C., & Kim, C. W., Fundamentals of Neutrino Physics and Astrophysics , Oxford 
University Press 2007. 
2. Kim, C. W., & Pevsner, A., Neutrinos in physics and astrophysics , Harwood Academic 
1993. 
 
Reference Books  
1. Fukugita, M., & Yanagida, T., Physics of Neutrinos, Springer Verlag 2003. 
2.Boehm,‎ F., & Vogel, P., Physics of Massive Neutrinos, Cambridge University Press 1992. 
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Dighe, A., Neutrino Physics,  Tata Institute of Fundamental Research Mumbai, 
https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL28B95E11276C75F6 
Preparatory Course Material  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Title Gauge theory of weak interactions Number PHL8XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Prerequisite Particle Physics   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide background to understand basic concepts of non -abelian global and local gauge 
symmetries. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Grasp the theoretical concepts of spontaneously broken symmetry, both global and local.  
2. Understand details of Glashow -Salam-Weinberg gauge theory of electroweak 
interactions. 
 
Contents  
Global non -Ablelian symmetries:  Flavor symmetries        and       , Non -Abelian global 
symmetries in Lagrangian quantum field theories, chiral symmetry. (4 Lectures) 
 
 Local  non-Ablelian symmetries:  Local SU(2) symmetry: the covariant derivative, Geometrical 
curvature and the gauge field strength tensor, Local  SU(3) symmetry, Local SU(2) and SU(3) 
Lagrangians, Quantizing non -Abelian gauge fields: Interaction of non -Abelian gauge bosons, 
The Faddeev -Popov Lagrangian, Ghosts and Unitarity, Becchi -Rouet-Stora-Tyutin (BRST) 
symmetry, One loop divergences of non-Abelian gauge theory,   function.  (8 Lectures) 
 
Spontaneous symmetry breaking: The Fabri-Picasso theorem, Spontaneously broken symmetry 
in condensed matter physics: The ferromagnet and The Bogoliubov superfluid, Goldstone‟s 
theorem, Spontaneously broken glo bal U(1) symmetry: the Goldstone model, Spontaneously 
broken global non -Abelian symmetry, Chiral Symmetry Breaking: The Nambu analogy, Two 
flavour QCD and        X        ,  Pion decay and the Goldberger -Treiman relation, The linear 
and nonliear σ -models, Chiral anomalies; Massive and massless vector particles, The 
generation of „photon mass‟ in a superconductor, Spontaneously broken local U(1) symmetry: 
the Abelian Higgs model, ‟t Hooft‟s gauges, Spontaneously broken local SU(2) X U(1) 
symmetry. (15 Lectures) 
 
Electroweak Unification: Violation of unitarity in the current –current model, The Intermediate 
vector Boson (IVB) model, Violation of unitarity bounds in the IVB model, The problem of non -
renormalizability in weak interactions, Glashow -Salam-Weinberg theory of Electroweak 
Interactions: Weak isospin and hypercharge, The SU(2) X U(1) group of the electroweak 
interactions, quantum number assignments and W and Z masses, The leptonic currents and 
massless neutrinos, The quark currents, simple tree -level predictions, Anomaly cancellations, 
The discovery of the    and    at the CERN     collider, The fermion mass problem, Quark  and 
neutrino flavour mixing, Higher -order corrections, The top quark, The Higgs sector, Theoretical 
considerations concerning Higgs mass, Higgs phenomenology, Discovery of Higgs Bosons. (15 
Lectures) 
Textbook 
1. Aitchison, I. J. R. & Hey, A. J. G., Gauge Theories in Particle Physics, Volume II: A Practical 
Introduction : Non-Abelian Gauge Theories : QCD and the Electoweak Theory, Taylor & 
Francis, 2003.  
2. Cheng, T. P. & Li, L. F., Gauge theory of elementary particle physics, Oxford University 
Press, 2000. 
Self Learning Material  
1. Langacker, P., The Standard Model, Institute of Advanced Study Princeton, 
https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLNhSjK9aGXjq22HAdhjMdJM3Ig4KdLayP  
Preparatory Course Material  
1. Peskin, M. E. & Schroeder, D. V., An Introduction to Quantum Field Theory, Addison-Wesley 
Pub. Co, 1995. 
 
 
  
 
Title Dark Energy Number PHL8XX0 
Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Prerequisite General Theory of Relativity   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide background to  understand concepts related to Dark Energy which is thought to 
comprise 68% of the known universe. 
2.  Provide background to develop insight of theoretical models of Dark Energy. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Grasp concepts of various matter and gravity modified models of Dark Energy. 
2. Understand details of a number of experimental methods to probe Dark Energy.  
 
Contents  
 
Theoretical Framework:  Friedmann equations, equation of state of dark energy, Correlat ion 
function and power spectrum, Cosmological perturbation theory, The Newtonian gauge, Single -
fluid model, Scales larger than the horizon, Scales smaller than the Hubble radius, Two -fluid 
solutions, The matter power spectrum, Perturbed photon propagation. (10 Lectures) 
 
Cosmological Constant: The fine tuning problem, The coincidence problem, Supersymmetric 
models, Cosmological constant and the anthropic principle, The decoupling of the cosmological 
constant from gravity. (4 Lectures) 
 
Modified Matter Model s of Dark Energy:  Quintessence, Quintessence potentials in particle 
physics, Reconstruction of quintessence from observations, k -essence, Phantoms, Coupled dark 
energy, Chameleon scalar fields, Dark energy models with scaling solutions, Unified models of 
dark energy and dark matter. (8 Lectures) 
 
Modified gravity Models of Dark Energy: f (R) gravity, Gauss –Bonnet dark energy models, 
Scalar-tensor theories, Dvali, Gabadadze and Porrati (DGP) braneworld model. (4 Lectures) 
 
Cosmic Acceleration without Dark Energy: Lemaître–Tolman–Bondi (LTB)  models, Backreaction 
of Cosmological Perturbations. (4 Lectures) 
 
Observational Methods: Type Ia Supernovae as Dark Energy Probe, Baryon Acoustic Oscillations 
(BAO) as Standard Ruler, Th e Alcock –Paczynski Test, Weak Gravitational Lensing, Weak 
Lensing Observational Results, Cluster Abundance as a Dark Energy Probe, X -Ray Gas Mass 
Fraction as a Dark Energy Probe, Gamma Ray Bursts and Radio Galaxies as Cosmological 
Probe.(12 Lectures) 
 
Textbook 
1.Amendola, L. &  Tsujikawa, S., (2010), Dark Energy: Theory and Observations , 
Cambridge University Press. 
2. Wang, Y., (2010),  Dark Energy, Wiley-VCH. 
3.  Dodelson, (2000), Modern Cosmology, Elsevier. 
 
Self Learning Material  
1.Turner, M., The Dark Side of the Universe: Dark Matter and Dark Energy,  Department of 
Astronomy and Astrophysics, University of Chicago,  
http://videolectures.net/cernacademictraining2010_turner_dark/ 
 
 
 
 